===== TS.1 =====
NUMBER: 1
SOURCE LABEL: Text 1

krsna-varnam tvisakrsnam
   sangopangastra-parsadam
   yajïaih sankirtana-prayair
   yajanti hi su-medhasah
“In the Age of Kali intelligent persons perform congregational  chanting  to
worship the incarnation of Godhead who constantly sings the names of  Krsna.
Although His complexion  is  not  blackish,  He  is  Krsna  Himself.  He  is
accompanied  by  His  associates,  servants,   weapons,   and   confidential
companions” [Srimad-Bhagavatam 11.5.32].


   COMMENTARY
   Invocation I
   natva krsnadasa-varyam prabhupadam tattvartha-dam
   bhasa-tikam karomy aham sri-vaisnavanam tustaye
“After paying my obeisances to the best among Lord Krsna’s  devotees,  Srila
Prabhupada,  who  has  imparted  knowledge  about  the  essence   of   Vedic
literature, I write this translation and
COMMENTARY  for the satisfaction of the Vaisnavas.”
   In the  Vedic  culture  every  undertaking  begins  with  an  invocation,
technically called mangalacarana. The purpose is to invoke the blessings  of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead so He may  remove  any  obstacle  to  the
completion of  the  work.  This  book,  Sri  Sat-sandarbha,  is  a  detailed
treatise  on  the  Lord’s  name,  fame,  abode,  qualities,  pastimes,   and
associates. As  such,  it  is  already  all-auspicious  and  thus  needs  no
invocation.  Srila  Jiva   Gosvami   nonetheless   performs   mangalacarana,
following in the footsteps of the previous  acaryas  and  setting  an  ideal
example for his readers.
   A book’s mangalacarana is of three types and may have one or more verses.
The three types are:
   Namas-kriyatmaka: paying obeisances to one’s  teacher(s)  or  worshipable
deity, or to both.
   Asir-vadatmaka:  praying  to  the  Lord  for  His  blessings,   bestowing
blessings upon the readers, or exclaiming “All glories to the Lord!”
   Vastu-nirdesatmaka: summarizing the subject matter of the book.
   Often the mangalacarana will also describe four essential elements of the
book, called anubandha-catustaya:
   adhikari ca sambandho visayas ca prayojanam
   avasyam eva vaktavyam sastradau tu catustayam
“At its beginning a book must describe these four items: the  qualifications
of the person who may read the book (adhikari), the connection  between  the
book and its subject (sambandha), the subject itself (visaya or  abhidheya),
and what the reader will gain by reading the book and following the path  it
prescribes (prayojana).” In  modern  books  these  four  items  are  usually
covered in the introduction.
   It is significant that Srila Jiva Gosvami begins his mangalacarana with a
quotation from Srimad-Bhagavatam and not with an original  verse.  By  doing
so he shows his reverence for Srimad-Bhagavatam and  his  surrender  to  the
instructions of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, for whom Srimad-Bhagavatam was  the
supreme scriptural authority. Srila Jiva Gosvami also implies  that  in  the
Sat-sandarbha he will analyze the Bhagavatam and establish  its  superiority
over all other scriptures. In addition,  this  verse  establishes  that  his
worshipable Deity is Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
   The opening verse was spoken by Karabhajana Rsi in response to a question
Maharaja Nimi posed concerning the Lord’s color, name, and mode  of  worship
in the various yugas. In this verse Karabhajana  Rsi  describes  the  Lord’s
incarnation in Kali-yuga, and in so doing he  indirectly  reveals  that  Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme Personality  of  Godhead.
Krsna-varnam indicates one who describes  the  pastimes  of  Lord  Krsna  to
others  or  who  always  chants  “Krsna,  Krsna.”  Sri  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu
certainly meets this criterion for  being  krsna-varna.  Varnam  also  means
“class” or “category.” So krsna-varnam may also indicate one who is  in  the
same class as Krsna. Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu is  krsna-varna  in  this
sense because He is nondifferent from  Lord  Sri  Krsna.  Varna  also  means
“letter” or “word,” and thus krsna-varnam also indicates one whose name  has
the word Krsna in it—in this case Sri Krsna Caitanya.
   Other  meanings  of  varna  are  “fame,”  “form,”  “outward  appearance,”
“quality,” and “ritual.” One may apply all  these  meanings  to  the  phrase
krsna-varnam  and  thus  understand  it  to  indicate  Sri  Krsna   Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. For example, krsna-varnam may indicate one whose  fame  is  like
Krsna’s or whose form is like Krsna’s.
   In Sarva-samvadini, a supplementary
   COMMENTARY  to Sri  Sat-sandarbha  by  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  himself,  he
explains that Lord Caitanya is referred to  as  krsna-varna  because  people
were reminded of Lord Sri Krsna just by seeing Him. Another reason  is  that
although Sri Caitanya displayed a golden complexion to the  common  man,  to
His intimate associates He  sometimes  appeared  blackish.  Finally,  krsna-
varna also means one who is blackish like Krsna, but in  the  case  of  Lord
Caitanya krsna-varna must refer to His inner  complexion.  This  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami explains in the next Text.
   The compound word tvisakrsnam may be broken as tvisa akrsnam, giving  the
meaning “whose bodily hue is not blackish.” In Srimad-Bhagavatam  (10.8.13),
Garga Muni tells Nanda Maharaja:
   asan varnas trayo hy asya grhnato ’nu-yugam tanuh
   suklo raktas tatha pita idanim krsnatam gatah
“Your son Krsna appears as an incarnation in every millennium. In  the  past
He assumed three different colors—white, red,  and  yellow—and  now  He  has
appeared in a blackish color.”
   According to Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Supreme Personality of Godhead had  a
white complexion when He appeared in Satya-yuga, a  reddish  one  in  Treta-
yuga, and a blackish one in Dvapara-yuga. So by the process  of  elimination
the word akrsnam, “non-blackish,”  must  indicate  the  incarnation  with  a
yellow complexion—that is, the  golden  avatara,  Sri  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu.
Garga Muni’s mention of His yellow  color  “in  previous  yugas”  may  refer
either  to  Lord  Caitanya’s  previous  appearances   or   to   His   future
appearances, but Garga Muni uses the past tense  because  he  is  mentioning
the yellow incarnation along with other incarnations  who  had  appeared  in
the past. The usage is similar to what a  person  might  say  if  he  saw  a
householder and fifteen brahmacaris walking on the  road:  “The  brahmacaris
are coming.” Yet another consideration is that Gargacarya may have used  the
past tense to hide Krsna’s future  incarnation  as  Lord  Caitanya.  Garga’s
purpose would have been to avoid confusing Nanda Maharaja and to play  along
with the Lord’s plan to  appear  in  Kali-yuga  as  the  channa-avatara,  or
hidden incarnation. This last  reason  is  why  the  Vedic  scriptures  only
indirectly refer to Lord Caitanya’s incarnation.
   In the Bhagavad-gita (7.25) Lord Krsna says, naham prakasah sarvasya yoga-
maya-samavrtah: “Because the veil of Yogamaya covers Me, I am  not  manifest
to everyone as I am.” This declaration specifically applies  to  the  Lord’s
appearance in Kali-yuga  as  Sri  Krsna  Caitanya.  Prahlada  Maharaja  also
refers to Lord Caitanya when he says in Srimad-Bhagavatam (7.9.38),  channah
kalau yad abhavas tri-yugo ’tha sa tvam: “O Lord, Your incarnation in  Kali-
yuga is hidden, or confidential, and therefore you are called Tri-yuga,  one
who incarnates in three yugas [namely Satya, Treta, and Dvapara].” Here  the
word channa (“covered”) also signifies that  Lord  Caitanya  is  Lord  Krsna
covered by the mood and complexion  of  Sri  Radhika.  The  Naradiya  Purana
(5.47) also foretells the Lord’s appearance as a devotee:
   aham eva kalau vipra nityam pracchanna-vigrahah
   bhagavad-bhakta-rupena lokan raksami sarvada
“The Lord said: ‘Concealing My real identity, O vipra  [Markandeya  Rsi],  I
appear in Kali-yuga  in  the  garb  of  a  devotee  and  always  protect  My
devotees.’”
   Tvisakrsnam may also be broken up as tvisa  krsnam,  meaning  “one  whose
complexion is blackish.” Although Lord Caitanya’s complexion was golden,  He
is Lord Krsna  Himself,  and  thus  the  words  tvisa  krsnam  indicate  His
original form as Lord Krsna, which He revealed  only  to  certain  devotees,
such as Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya.
   Sangopangastra-parsadam means “with His limbs,  ornaments,  weapons,  and
associates.” According  to  Srila  Baladeva  Vidyabhusana,  Lord  Caitanya’s
limbs are Lord Nityananda Prabhu  and  Advaita  Acarya,  His  ornaments  are
Srivasa Thakura, Srila Haridasa Thakura, and others,  His  weapons  are  the
holy names, which  dispel  ignorance,  and  His  associates  are  Gadadhara,
Govinda, and the many other devotees  who  stayed  with  Him  in  Jagannatha
Puri.
   Sangopangastra-parsadam may also refer to Lord  Caitanya’s  form  as  Sri
Krsna, which He showed to His intimate devotees.  This  form  has  beautiful
limbs decorated with ornaments (such as the Kaustubha gem), which  act  like
weapons by attracting one’s mind toward Lord Krsna and  thus  killing  one’s
demoniac mentality. The Lord’s ornaments are also associates of  His,  since
they are living persons and are His devotees.
   The words yajïaih sankirtana-prayair yajanti hi  su-medhasah  convey  the
following meaning: The Vedas recommend many  processes  for  worshiping  the
Supreme Lord, but in Kali-yuga the wise worship Him  by  chanting  His  holy
names congregationally. Lord Caitanya inaugurated this process and  is  thus
called the father of the sankirtana movement.
   Su-medhasah means “people of fine intelligence.” The implication is  that
less intelligent people will  worship  the  Lord  in  other  ways  and  that
outright fools will oppose the sankirtana movement. Sankirtana is very  dear
to  Lord  Sri  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu.  He  Himself  was  always  absorbed  in
performing sankirtana, and He enjoined everyone  to  participate,  declaring
it the universal remedypanacea for all the defects  of  Kali-yuga.  Sukadeva
Gosvami confirms this in Srimad-Bhagavatam (12.3.51–52):
   kaler dosa-nidhe rajann asti hy eko mahan gunah
   kirtanad eva krsnasya mukta-sangah param vrajet


   krte yad dhyayato visnum tretayam yajato makhaih
   dvapare paricaryayam kalau tad dhari-kirtanat
“My dear king, although Kali-yuga is an ocean of faults, there is still  one
good quality about this age: Simply by chanting the names of Krsna  one  can
become free from material bondage and  be  promoted  to  the  transcendental
kingdom. Whatever result was obtained in Satya-yuga by meditating on  Visnu,
in Treta-yuga by performing sacrifices, and in Dvapara-yuga by  serving  the
Lord’s lotus feet can be obtained in Kali-yuga simply by chanting  the  Hare
Krsna maha-mantra.”
   Srila Jiva  Gosvami’s  worshipable  Deity  is  Sri  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu.
Therefore Jiva Gosvami begins his topmost literary achievement by quoting  a
verse about Sri Caitanya  from  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  the  supreme  scriptural
authority for all time. This is a vastu-nirdesatmaka mangalacarana.


===== TS.2 =====
NUMBER: 2
SOURCE LABEL: Text 2

antah krsnam bahir gauram
   darsitangadi-vaibhavam
   kalau sankirtanadyaih smah
   krsna-caitanyam asritah
In Kali-yuga we take shelter of Sri Krsna Caitanya by  chanting  the  Lord’s
holy names congregationally and engaging in other devotional  practices.  He
is blackish within but golden without, and He has revealed to  everyone  the
opulences of His beautiful bodily limbs and other features.


   COMMENTARY
   Invocation II
   Here Srila Jiva Gosvami explains the meaning of the opening  verse.  Lord
Krsna, whose  complexion  is  blackish,  covered  Himself  with  the  golden
complexion of Srimati Radharani to appear in Kali-yuga  as  Krsna  Caitanya.
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but His purpose is to show us  how
to be devotees of the Lord. For this reason it is not readily apparent  that
He is the Supreme Lord, and  so  Srimad-Bhagavatam  describes  Him  as  “the
hidden incarnation.” Or, alternatively, the words antah krsnam bahir  gauram
here may be taken to mean not that Lord  Caitanya  is  blackish  within  and
golden without but that He is Krsna within  though  outwardly  appearing  as
Gaura, Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Srila Jiva Gosvami also indicates here that  one
can please Lord Krsna Caitanya by chanting the Hare Krsna maha-mantra.
   Darsitangadi-vaibhavam means that Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu manifested His
opulence through His limbs and associates. His body was  so  beautiful  that
just by seeing Him people would be inspired to surrender  to  Him.  He  also
manifested His supremacy through Nityananda Prabhu and other associates  who
preached the chanting of the holy name. This phrase can also mean that  Lord
Caitanya manifested the ’greatness of his associates  by  engaging  them  in
distributing love of Godhead.
   By using the plural form “we” in the phrase “we take shelter of Sri Krsna
Caitanya,” Srila Jiva Gosvami includes the readers of Sri Sat-sandarbha.  He
invites  them  to  join  him  in  taking  shelter  of   Lord   Caitanya   by
participating  in  the  sankirtana  movement,  the  universal  process   for
pleasing the Supreme Lord and attaining deliverance.  By  using  the  plural
Sri Jiva also implies that Lord Caitanya’s teachings are not  limited  to  a
particular sect or nationality.
   So far Srila Jiva Gosvami has described his worshipable  Deity.  Next  he
performs asir-vadatmaka-mangalacarana, invoking auspiciousness by  declaring
the glories of his spiritual masters.


===== TS.3 =====
NUMBER: 3
SOURCE LABEL: Text 3

jayatam mathura-bhumau
   Srila-rupa-sanatanau
   yau vilekhayatas tattvam
   jïapakau pustikam imam
All glories to Srila Rupa Gosvami and Srila Sanatana Gosvami in the land  of
Mathura! They have  engaged  me  in  writing  this  book  to  broadcast  the
essential truth about the Supreme Lord.


   COMMENTARY
   Invocaton III
   Here Srila Jiva Gosvami  explains  his  reason  for  composing  the  Sat-
sandarbha. He is doing so at the behest of his spiritual masters,  Rupa  and
Sanatana Gosvamis, who are also  his  uncles.  Jiva  Gosvami  studied  under
them, and they asked him to compile their teachings  into  a  book  for  the
benefit of all. This request  is  indicated  by  the  word  jïapakau,  which
literally means “those who like to teach others.”
   Previously Srila Rupa and Srila  Sanatana  were  glorious  in  Bengal  as
ministers of Hussein Shah. Now they are glorious in  the  land  of  Mathura,
which is itself glorious, being the place of Lord Krsna’s  pastimes.  To  be
glorious in this land means to have  the  wealth  of  krsna-prema,  love  of
Godhead, which is the most rare possession. To show  this  achievement  Jiva
Gosvami adds the honorofic “Srila” before  their  names.  “Srila”  signifies
that Rupa and Sanatana Gosvamis are endowed with  transcendental  knowledge,
renunciation, devotional service, and love of God. Srila Jiva Gosvami  prays
that through the Sat-sandarbha these two  great  souls  may  manifest  their
opulence and glory for the welfare of others.
   According to Sanskrit grammatical rules, the  pronoun  imam  (“this”)  is
used for objects near at hand. Since at this point Jiva Gosvami  is  in  the
process of writing the Sat-sandarbha, his  mention  here  of  pustikam  imam
(“this book”) may seem a defect. Baladeva  Vidyabhusana  comments,  however,
that because the book already exists within the author’s mind, his usage  is
proper.


===== TS.4 =====
NUMBER: 4
SOURCE LABEL: Text 4

ko ’pi tad-bandhavo bhatto
   daksina-dvija-vamsa-jah
   vivicya vyalikhad grantham
   likhitad vrddha-vaisnavaih
Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, a friend of Sri Rupa’s and  Sri  Sanatana’s  born
in a South Indian brahmana family, compiled the  original  version  of  this
book based on the works of venerable Vaisnavas.


   COMMENTARY
   The Source of Sri Sat-sandarbha
   Srila Gopala Bhatta Gosvami was the  son  of  Venkata  Bhatta,  the  head
priest of the temple of Lord  Ranganatha  at  Sri  Rangam,  where  the  Sri-
vaisnava sect has its headquarters.  It  was  in  Venkata’s  home  that  Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu stayed for the four months of the  rainy  season  during
His tour of South India. There He and Venkata discussed  philosophy,  as  is
known from the  Caitanya-caritamrta,  Madhya-lila,  chapter  nine,  and  the
Bhakti-ratnakara, first wave. At that time Gopala Bhatta was  a  young  boy,
and he learned the intricacies of Gaudiya-vaisnava philosophy directly  from
Sri Caitanya. Later he studied the writings of the eminent Vaisnavas of  the
Sri-sampradaya. On Lord  Caitanya’s  order  Gopala  Bhatta  later  moved  to
Vrndavana, where he established the temple of Sri Radha-ramana.  He  is  one
of the great authorities on Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s teachings.
   As we shall learn further on, the venerable Vaisnavas Srila Jiva  Gosvami
refers to here as sources  for  Srila  Gopala  Bhatta  Gosvami  include  Sri
Ramanujacarya, Sri Madhvacarya, and  Sridhara  Svami.  Srila  Gopala  Bhatta
Gosvami culled the essence from the works  of  these  previous  acaryas  and
Vaisnava scholars and then composed a book explaining the  essential  truths
about Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That book is the basis  for
the present work. In this way Jiva Gosvami hints at the authenticity of  his
work, for by basing it on Srila Gopala  Bhatta  Gosvami’s  book  he  implies
that the work is authoritative, free of concocted ideas.


===== TS.5 =====
NUMBER: 5
SOURCE LABEL: Text 5

tasyadyam granthanalekham
   kranta-vyutkranta-khanditam
   paryalocyatha paryayam
   krtva likhati jivakah
   Some parts of this first book by Gopala Bhatta Gosvami  were  in  correct
sequence, and some were not. Some parts were incomplete or lost. Now,  after
careful study, Jiva is rewriting this book in the proper sequence.


   COMMENTARY
   Homage to Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami
   The following question may arise: If Gopala Bhatta  Gosvami  had  already
composed a work on this subject, why should Rupa and Sanatana  have  engaged
Jiva Gosvami in compiling a similar  work?  Jiva  Gosvami  replies  in  this
verse: His mission is to complete the task that Gopala Bhatta Gosvami  began
and to set the material in proper order. In the  previous  two  verses  Jiva
Gosvami has already established that his  work  is  not  a  product  of  his
imagination but is based on the authority of  the  scriptures  and  previous
acaryas.
   By using the word jivaka, Jiva Gosvami makes a pun on  his  name.  Jivaka
means “a petty soul,” or else it can be taken as the  name  of  the  author.
Out of humility the author refers to himself here in the third  person.  The
suffix kan is used in this con
   TEXT in a diminutive sense, to indicate that a humble soul is writing.
   As jivanugas, or followers of  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami,  we  may  prefer  to
interpret jivaka in other ways. We may, for example,  apply  the  definition
jivan kapayati bhagavatartha-pradanandeneti  jivakah:  “One  who  makes  the
living beings emit ecstatic sounds  by  supplying  them  with  the  esoteric
meaning of Srimad-Bhagavatam [through his Bhagavata-sandarbha]  is  jivaka.”
Or,    alternatively,    jiva-svarupa-sambandhabhidheya-prayojanan    kayati
varnayatiti jivakah: “One who explains the nature of the jiva, his  relation
with the Lord, the process by which he can  achieve  the  ultimate  goal  of
life, and also that ultimate goal—such a person  is  jivaka.”  Or,  jivayati
jivan krsna-prema-pradaneneti jivo, jiva eva jivaka iti  svarthe  kan:  “One
who infuses life into living beings by giving them love  of  Krsna  is  jiva
or, equivalently, jivaka.” Finally, the word jivaka may also  be  formed  by
applying to the root jiv the suffix -aka in  the  sense  of  “blessing.”  In
this case jivaka means “the person  who  confers  blessings  on  the  living
entities.”


===== TS.6 =====
NUMBER: 6
SOURCE LABEL: Text 6

yah Sri-krsna-padambhoja-
   bhajanaikabhilasa-van
   tenaiva drsyatam etad
   anyasmai sapatho ’rpitah
   This book may be studied only by one whose sole desire is  to  serve  the
lotus feet of Lord Sri Krsna. I warn everyone else not to read it.


   COMMENTARY
   Qualifications of the Reader
   Here Srila Jiva Gosvami defines the adhikari,  the  person  qualified  to
read Sri Sat-sandarbha. Sri Jiva  is  writing  only  for  those  whose  sole
desire is to serve Lord Krsna. He bars all others from  reading  this  work.
What prompts him to do so is not fear that critics will find defects in  his
work; since he is  working  under  the  order  and  supervision  of  learned
Vaisnavas, namely Rupa Gosvami and  Sanatana  Gosvami,  and  since  all  his
statements will be based on scripture, there  is  no  question  of  defects.
Rather, it is out of  compassion  that  Jiva  Gosvami  says  that  the  Sat-
sandarbha “may be studied only by one whose sole  desire  is  to  serve  the
lotus feet of Lord Sri Krsna.” His intention is to prohibit those  who  have
no desire to engage in devotional service from reading his book. In the Sat-
sandarbha he intends to establish the glories of the Supreme Personality  of
Godhead with great logic and force and with  scriptural  reference.  Such  a
book will displease those who have no desire to be devoted  to  the  Supreme
Lord, since they cannot tolerate His glorification. If such  persons  happen
to read this book, they  may  become  offensive  toward  the  Lord  and  His
devotees  and  thus  bring  hellish  miseries  upon  themselves.  For  their
benefit, therefore, Sri Jiva pens this statement  forbidding  them  to  read
Sri Sat-sandarbha.
   In the Bhagavad-gita (18.67), Lord Krsna imposesd a  similar  restriction
on Arjuna:
   idam te natapaskaya nabhaktaya kadacana
   na casusrusave vacyam na ca mam yo ’bhyasuyati
“This confidential knowledge may never be explained to  those  who  are  not
austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor  to  one  who  is
envious of Me.”
   In this
   TEXT the word eka (“only”) significantly  means  that  even  among  those
desiring to render service  to  Lord  Krsna,  none  should  harbor  personal
ambition in his heart and  misuse  Sri  Sat-sandarbha  for  gaining  profit,
adoration, and distinction.
   Finally, here Srila Jiva Gosvami indicates indirectly that  in  Sri  Sat-
sandarbha he will establish service to Lord Krsna as  the  supreme  goal  of
life.


===== TS.7 =====
NUMBER: 7
SOURCE LABEL: Text 7

atha natva mantra-gurun
   gurun bhagavatartha-dan
   Sri-bhagavata-sandarbham
   sandarbham vasmi lekhitum
   After offering obeisances to my initiating spiritual master and to  those
spiritual masters who taught me the meaning of Srimad-Bhagavatam, I wish  to
write this book called Sri Bhagavata-sandarbha.


   COMMENTARY
   Homage to the Teachers
   After showing reverence to his teachers, Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  names  his
book in this verse. He calls it Sri Bhagavata-sandarbha  because  in  it  he
will explain  the  essential  meanings  of  the  Bhagavata  Purana  (Srimad-
Bhagavatam). To explain the term sandarbha, in his
   COMMENTARY  on this
   TEXT Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana quotes a  well-known  verse  of  unknown
origin:
   gudharthasya prakasas ca saroktih sresthata tatha
   nanartha-vatvam vedyatvam sandarbhah kathyate budhaih
“A literary work that  explains  the  confidential  aspects  of  a  subject,
incorporates its essence, explains the superiority  of  the  subject,  gives
its various meanings, and  is  worth  learning  is  called  a  sandarbha  by
learned scholars.”
   The Bhagavata-sandarbha is  also  called  the  Sat-sandarbha  because  it
contains six books, the Tattva-,  Bhagavat-,  Paramatma-,  Krsna-,  Bhakti-,
and Priti-sandarbhas. Each Sandarbha is an analysis of  the  subject  stated
in its title, and each is based on  Srimad-Bhagavatam.  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami
also wrote a verse-by-verse
   COMMENTARY  on Srimad-Bhagavatam called the Krama-sandarbha, and this  is
sometimes referred to as the seventh Sandarbha.
   Both Vaisnavas and others have  written  many  essays  and  treatises  on
Srimad-Bhagavatam, but among all of them these six works stand as  the  most
exhaustive exposition of the Bhagavata philosophy. His Divine  Grace  A.  C.
Bhaktivedanta  Swami  Prabhupada  joined  the  other   acaryas   coming   in
succession after  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  in  praising  him  as  the  greatest
Vaisnava philosopher of all time. Srila Prabhupada called Sri  Sat-sandarbha
“the last word on the teachings of Lord Caitanya  Mahaprabhu.”  Thus  it  is
clear that Srila Jiva Gosvami is perfectly justified  in  giving  the  title
sandarbha to his work.
   In the next Text, while giving blessings to  his  readers,  Jiva  Gosvami
indirectly explains the subject matter of  the  Sat-sandarbha,  the  process
presented in the book by which  one  can  attain  the  goal,  and  the  goal
itself.


===== TS.8 =====
NUMBER: 8
SOURCE LABEL: Text 8

yasya brahmeti samjïam kvacid api nigame yati cin-matra-sattapy
   amso yasyamsakaih svair vibhavati vasayann eva mayam pumams ca
   ekam yasyaiva rupam vilasati parama-vyomni narayanakhyam
   sa Sri-krsno vidhattam svayam iha bhagavan prema tat-pada-bhajam
   The feature of Lord Krsna as pure  consciousness,  without  any  manifest
characteristics, is called  Brahman  in  some  portions  of  the  Vedas.  In
another feature  He  expands  as  the  Purusa,  who  controls  the  external
potency, Maya,  by  His  many  plenary  portions.  In  yet  another  of  His
principal forms He is present as Narayana in the spiritual  sky,  Vaikuntha.
May that Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of  Godhead,  bestow  love  for
Himself on those who worship His lotus feet in this world.


   COMMENTARY
   The Essence of Sri Sat-sandarbha
   Although one without a second, Lord Sri Krsna has  limitless  expansions.
His feature that manifests as dazzling effulgence, without form,  qualities,
or opulences, is  called  Brahman  in  some  sections  of  the  Vedas.  Some
transcendentalists worship this undivided, formless aspect of the  Absolute,
considering it the ultimate reality. For such persons  the  Absolute  Truth,
Lord Krsna, appears as impersonal Brahman.  This  feature  of  the  Lord  is
described in the Taittiriya Upanisad (2.1.1): satyam jïanam anantam  brahma.
“Brahman is eternal, conscious, and unlimited.”
   Another aspect of Lord  Krsna  is  His  controlling  feature  called  the
Purusa. There are three such Purusa expansions. The first is  Karanodakasayi
Visnu, who lies in the Causal Ocean and  is  the  Supersoul  of  the  entire
material creation. The Lord has only  one  Karanodakasayi  Visnu  expansion,
also called Maha-Visnu. He activates the material energy  with  His  glance.
The second Purusa is Garbhodakasayi Visnu, the  Supersoul  expansion  within
each of the innumerable universes. He is the source  of  the  various  lila-
avataras, the  Supreme  Lord’s  pastime  incarnations,  who  appear  in  the
various  universes.  The  Supreme  Lord  delegates  the  responsibility  for
creating each universe to one of the innumerable Brahmas, each  of  whom  is
born from the lotus flower growing from Garbhodakasayi Visnu’s lotus  navel.
The third Purusa is Ksirodakasayi Visnu, who expands  as  the  Supersoul  in
all life forms, and indeed in every atom.
   These three Purusavataras are  also  called  Sankarsana,  Pradyumna,  and
Aniruddha, respectively. Krsna controls  the  material  nature  through  the
agency of His Purusa incarnations. A  summary  description  of  these  three
Purusa manifestations is given in the Satvata-tantra (cited by Rupa  Gosvami
in his Laghu-bhagavatamrta 1.25):
   visnos tu trini rupani purusakhyany atho viduh
   ekam tu mahatah srastr dvitiyam tv anda-samsthitam
   trtiyam sarva-bhuta-stham tani jïatva vimucyate
“Lord Visnu has three forms called Purusas. The first is Maha-Visnu, who  is
the  creator  of  the  total  material  energy  [mahat],   the   second   is
Garbhodakasayi Visnu, who is situated within each universe,  and  the  third
is Ksirodakasayi, who lives in the heart  of  every  living  being.  He  who
knows these three becomes liberated from the clutches of Maya.”
   Beyond the material creation is the  spiritual  sky  (para-vyoma),  which
contains the various spiritual planets, called Vaikunthas. The  chief  Deity
in the spiritual sky is Lord  Narayana,  a  vilasa  expansion  of  Lord  Sri
Krsna. The Laghu-bhagavatamrta (1.15) defines a vilasa form as follows:


   svarupam anyakaram yat tasya bhati vilasatah
   prayenatma-samam saktya sa vilaso nigadyate
“When the Lord expands into a form that appears different from His  original
form but has almost all His  original  qualities,  that  form  is  called  a
vilasa expansion.”
   Lord Krsna in His  two-handed  form  is  svayam  bhagavan,  the  original
Personality  of  Godhead.  This  svayam-rupa  is  described  in  the  Laghu-
bhagavatamrta (1.12): ananyapeksi yad rupam svayam-rupah  sa  ucyate.  “That
form of the Supreme Lord which is not a dependent expansion  of  some  other
form is called svayam-rupa, a ‘self-sufficient form.’”  The  Lord’s  svayam-
rupa is grounded in itself and is the  basis  of  all  other  forms.  It  is
completely independent, second to no  other  form.  In  Sri  Krsna-sandarbha
Srila Jiva Gosvami will explain all this in greater detail. Here he  briefly
describes the essence of Srimad-Bhagavatam, giving us a seed  that  he  will
cultivate  until  it  gradually  grows  into  the  tree  of  Sri  Bhagavata-
sandarbha.
   Words have an integral relationship with their meaning, or reference, and
in Sanskrit linguistics this relationship is called  vacya-vacaka-sambandha.
Similarly, a book has an integral relationship with its subject through  the
meanings of the words that constitute it. In the present
   TEXT the phrase sa krsnah indicates that svayam bhagavan, Lord Sri Krsna,
is the subject (visaya) of the Sat-sandarbha.  By  this  phrase  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami establishes the vacya-vacaka-sambandha  between  his  book  and  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna.
   The process (abhidheya)  for  realizing  Lord  Sri  Krsna  is  devotional
service to His lotus feet, a fact indicated by  the  words  tat-pada-bhajam.
The purpose (prayojana) of this  process  is  to  attain  love  of  Godhead,
indicated by the word prema. In this way Srila Jiva Gosvami here alludes  to
the four introductory topics mentioned in
   TEXT 1: the subject  of  the  book,  the  book’s  relationship  with  the
subject, the process of achieving the final purpose, and the  final  purpose
itself. In the next
   TEXT he explicitly states these four and explains the means of  acquiring
valid knowledge about them.


===== TS.9 =====
NUMBER: 9
SOURCE LABEL: Text 9

athaivam  sucitanam   Sri-krsna-tad-vacya-vacakata-laksana-sambandha-tad-
bhajana-laksana-vidheya-saparyayabhidheya-tat-prema-laksana-
prayojanakhyanam  arthanam  nirnayaya  tavat   pramanam   nirniyate.   tatra
purusasya bhramadi-dosa-catustaya-dustatvat sutaram alaukikacintya-svabhava-
vastu-sparsayogyatvac ca tat-pratyaksadiny api sa-dosani.
   Four topics were suggested in the previous Text: Sri Krsna as the subject
(visaya),  the  connection  between  Him  and  the  words   describing   Him
(sambandha), service to Him as  the  recommended  process  to  be  performed
(abhidheya or  vidheya),  and  pure  love  for  Him  as  the  final  purpose
(prayojana).
   Now, to understand these topics we should first determine  the  means  of
acquiring valid knowledge. Human beings are  bound  to  have  four  defects:
They are subject to  delusion,  make  mistakes,  tend  to  cheat,  and  have
imperfect senses. Thus their direct perception, inference, and so forth  are
deficient, especially since these means of knowing  cannot  help  them  gain
access to the inconceivable spiritual reality.


   COMMENTARY
   Vaisnava Epistemology
   Without knowing the purpose of a book, a prospective reader  is  unlikely
to take a keen interest in it, so in the previous
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami outlines his subject and purpose. Now,  with  the
phrase tad-bhajana-laksana-vidheya, he states  that  devotional  service  as
explained in the Vedic scriptures is the process  for  achieving  the  final
goal, prema-bhakti. But  before  one  practices  any  important  process  he
should have correct knowledge about it. Thus the need arises for  discerning
the various means of acquiring valid  knowledge.  This  portion  of  Tattva-
sandarbha therefore deals with Vaisnava  epistemology.  Jiva  Gosvami  first
establishes  the  validity  of  his  means  of  acquiring  knowledge  before
analyzing the four topics mentioned in the previous  Text.  In  English  the
word “knowledge” means valid knowledge.  In  Sanskrit,  valid  knowledge  is
called prama, and a means of acquiring it is called pramana.  Sometimes  the
word pramana is used to mean “proof,” “evidence,” or “authority.”
   Jiva Gosvami is  concerned  with  establishing  an  infallible  means  of
acquiring knowledge. Ordinary human beings  use  various  means  to  acquire
knowledge, but none of these is infallible. This fallibility is due  to  the
four inherent defects found in all ordinary humans. Without exception  every
ordinary human  being  has  the  tendency  to  be  deluded  (bhrama),  makes
mistakes  (pramada),  has  a  cheating  propensity  (vipralipsa),  and   has
imperfect senses (karanapatava).
   Bhrama, or mistaken  identification,  is  of  two  kinds.  The  first  is
identification of  the  body  as  the  self.  Everyone  is  born  with  this
delusion, but how completely we  identify  with  our  body  depends  on  our
attachment  to  it.  Because  of  this  defect  we  mistake  the  temporary,
miserable sense objects as permanent sources of pleasure.  The  second  kind
of mistaken identification occurs when we think we perceive  something  that
in fact is not present, as in the case of a mirage or hallucination.
   Pramada, the second of the  four  defects,  is  our  tendency  to  become
deluded because of inattention.  If  our  mind  is  not  connecting  with  a
particular perceiving sense—the eyes, ears, nose, tongue, or skin—we do  not
get the knowledge it can supply. For example, we may sit through  a  lecture
but miss portions of it because our mind is wandering.
   The third  defect  is  vipralipsa,  the  propensity  to  cheat.  Material
conditioning causes us to  consider  ourselves  the  material  body,  which,
being temporary, can  never  give  us  real  happiness.  But  still  out  of
delusion we seek happiness through sense  gratification.  When  we  fail  to
obtain this to our full satisfaction, we take to  cheating  to  improve  our
chances. Friends cheat friends, politicians cheat the  public,  and  so  on.
Even in spiritual life a so-called guru will cheat his disciple by  teaching
some materialistic  philosophy  as  the  absolute  truth,  or  an  insincere
disciple will try to cheat his  guru  by  transgressing  the  guru’s  orders
while pretending to follow them.or an insincere disciple will try  to  cheat
his guru. This cheating propensity  manifests  on  all  levels  of  material
existence.
   The last of the four defects is karanapatava, imperfect senses.  We  have
five perceptive senses—the eyes, ears,  tongue,  nose,  and  skin.  Each  of
these functions only within a limited range. The human  eye,  for  instance,
can see light between infrared and ultraviolet wavelengths,  but  there  are
many other wavelengths the eye cannot discern—radio waves,  x-rays,  and  so
on. Even within the visible range our eyes cannot see clearly if  the  light
is too bright or too dim, if the object is too far or too close, or  if  the
eyes themselves  are  diseaseddefective.  Upon  analysis,  each  sense  will
reveal a similar built-in limitation.
   The conclusion is that since these four defects make  perfectly  reliable
knowledge about material  objects  a  rare  achievement,  perfect  knowledge
about the transcendental realm is altogether  impossible  by  the  means  we
commonly accept. This premise is the cornerstone of Vedic  epistemology.  Of
course, by acknowledging these four defects one will find the  quest  for  a
reliable pramana to be an exacting challenge.
   Among India’s philosophical traditions there are a total of ten pramanas,
or means of acquiring valid knowledge. Each philosophical school  recognizes
a certain combination of  these  as  valid  and  may  present  arguments  to
support its opinion. These ten traditional pramanas,  with  the  three  most
important ones listed last, are as follows:
   1. Arsa: the statements of an authoritative sage or  demigod.  There  are
many exceptional sages, such as Kapila, Gautama, and Pataïjali, who  founded
their own schools  of  philosophy.  Naturally  these  authorities’  opinions
differ, and therefore the Mahabharata (Vana-parva 313.117) says, nasav  rsir
yasya matam na bhinnam: “One is not considered a philosopher if his  opinion
does not differ from  the  opinions  of  other  philosophers.”  Since  these
philosophers are all profound thinkers, we take their utterances  seriously,
but an ordinary person can hardly determine which philosopher’s  opinion  is
correct. For Vaisnavas, the criterion for judging whether a particular  arsa
opinion is valid is whether it conforms to the principal pramanas.
   2. Upamana: comparison. We can identify something about which we have  no
prior knowledge after it has been compared to a familiar object. Suppose  we
have seen an ordinary cow but never  a  gavaya  (forest  cow),  and  someone
tells us that a gavaya resembles a cow. Then we may recognize a gavaya  when
we see one.
   3. Arthapatti: presumption. By this means we assume an  unknown  fact  or
facts  to  account  for  some  known  fact  or  facts  that  are   otherwise
inexplicable. For example, if we  know  that  fat  Devadatta  does  not  eat
during the day, we can safely assume he must eat  at  night.  Otherwise  his
stoutness is inexplicable.
   4. Abhava: absence. Failing to perceive an object by means of a  suitable
sense is considered perception of the absence of that object.  For  example,
a book is a suitable object for visual perception, and the  eyes  constitute
the suitable instrument for this perception. Thus when one does  not  see  a
book on a table, one is experiencing the  book’s  absence.  Such  abhava  is
classified as a separate category of perception because in it  there  is  no
actual contact between the object and the sense instrument, as  there  would
be in ordinary  sensory  perception.  What  is  perceived  is  the  object’s
absence.
   5. Sambhava: inclusion. This pramana is based on  our  common  experience
that a larger quantity includes some smaller quantity. For  example,  if  we
know  someone  possesses  a  hundred  dollars,  we  automatically  know   he
possesses one dollar, five dollars, ten dollars, and so  on.  This  kind  of
reasoning, based on the principle of inclusion, is called sambhava.
   6. Aitihya: tradition. This pramana is applied when some accepted fact is
known by common  belief  or  tradition  but  the  original  source  of  that
knowledge is unknown. For instance, there  is  a  popular  belief  that  the
Pandavas built the Old Fort in what is now New Delhi. There  is  no  written
proof or scriptural authority to  support  this  belief,  but  it  has  been
passed down for generations to the present day  and  is  nearly  universally
accepted as corresponding to fact.
   7. Cesta: gesture. This pramana comes into play when one learns something
from a knowledgeable person’s gestures or from  symbols.  For  instance,  we
may make a “V” sign with our fingers to indicate victory, or  a  pujari  may
show the Deity mudras to convey certain messages.
   8. Pratyaksa: direct perception. Directly perceiving something  with  our
senses can be the means to either valid or invalid knowledge. But only  that
sense perception  which  leads  to  valid  knowledge  should  be  considered
pramana. Sense perception is the principal means of acquiring  knowledge  in
this  material  world.  Both  theistic  and  atheistic  philosophers  accept
pratyaksa-pramana as one of the means to valid knowledge. Direct  perception
is of two types—external and internal. An external  perception  occurs  when
we acquire knowledge through  the  senses.  In  an  internal  perception  we
acquire knowledge directly through the mind, as when  we  perceive  emotions
such as pain, pleasure, love, and hate. In  the  Bhagavad-gita  (15.7)  Lord
Krsna lists the mind as the sixth sense (manah-sasthanindriyani).
   Because of our four inherent human defects, pratyaksa  is  not  always  a
reliable means with which to acquire valid knowledge.  For  one  thing,  its
scope is limited only to the present, since it cannot extend into  the  past
or future. Moreover, it is limited only to  material  things.  According  to
Srila Jiva Gosvami, however, perfect devotees who achieve direct  perception
of the Lord, His abode, and His  associates  through  spiritual  trance  all
have pure senses and have transcended the four  defects.  For  such  persons
pratyaksa is a reliable source of knowledge because their  sense  perception
is completely pure. Lord Krsna confirms this in the  Ninth  Chapter  of  the
Bhagavad-gita (9.2) when He  says  that  “this  knowledge  leads  to  direct
realization of transcendence by experience (pratyaksavagamam).” And  in  the
sixth chapter (Bg. 6.21) the Lord likewise assures Arjuna that in the  state
of transcendental trance, samadhi,  a  devotee  acquires  perfect  knowledge
through his purified intelligence and transcendental senses  (buddhi-grahyam
atindriyam vetti). This experience of  pure  Vaisnavas  is  called  vaidusa-
pratyaksa, and it is flawless.
   9. Anumana: inference based on generalized experience. The  word  anumana
literally  means  “knowing  after.”  Based   on   repeated   experience   or
authoritative  verbal  testimony,  one  arrives  at  some  probable  general
principle, called vyapti (“invariable concomitance”).  One  can  then  apply
this principle in specific cases to deduce unknown facts.
   Inference is of two kinds, for oneself and  for  others.  An  example  of
inference for oneself, which is less formal, is the process of  reasoning  a
person goes through when he repeatedly sees, in the kitchen  and  elsewhere,
the  concomitance  between  smoke  and  fire  and  arrives  at  the  general
principle “Wherever there’s smoke, there’s fire.”  Then  if  he  sees  smoke
hanging over a mountain in the distance, he may  recall  the  principle  and
conclude, “There is a fire on the mountain.”
   Inference for others uses a five-step syllogistic formula. After arriving
at an inferred conclusion for himself, a person uses this method  to  enable
others to infer the same conclusion. The syllogistic format is as follows:
   1. Proposition: There is a fire on the mountain.
   2. Reason: Because there’s smoke.
   3. General principle and example: Wherever there’s smoke,  there’s  fire,
as in the kitchen.
   4. Application: There is smoke over the mountain.
   5. Conclusion: Therefore there is a fire on the mountain.
   If there is any error in perceiving the reason or any  deviation  in  the
universal generalization, the inference will be faulty  and  its  conclusion
unreliable. In the above example, if the observer mistakes clouds  over  the
mountain for smoke or sees the smoke just after rain  has  extinguished  the
fire, his deduction that a fire is burning on the mountain  will  be  wrong.
Like pratyaksa, therefore, anumana is not a  foolproof  means  of  acquiring
knowledge.
   10. Sabda: revealed knowledge. Sabda literally  means  sound,  but  as  a
pramana it refers to articulate, meaningful sound spoken or  written  by  an
apta-purusa, a trustworthy person who is  an  authority  on  the  matter  in
question. In its ultimate sense the term sabda refers to revealed  knowledge
that concerns the transcendental reality and that  has  come  from  reliable
authorities free from the four human defects. This  kind  of  sabda  differs
from the language used in mundane transactions, which is  called  pauruseya-
sabda and is not always reliable. For Srila Jiva Gosvami,  sabda-pramana  is
restricted to the revealed knowledge of the Vedas. It is called  apauruseya-
sabda, revealed knowledge from a superhuman source. It originated  with  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and is received in disciplic succession  from
a bona fide guru. Apauruseya-sabda is therefore the perfect pramana  because
it is free from the four defects.
   At present, people who fail to accept the authority of  apauruseya-sabda-
pramana generally fall into two groups: those in the first group  doubt  the
very existence of a  transcendental  reality  beyond  the  empirical  world;
those in the second group accept the existence of such a  reality,  and  may
even accept the principle of  hearing  from  apauruseya-sabda-pramana  as  a
means of knowing about it, but unfortunately they also accept  one  or  more
pauruseya sources of sabda-pramana  as  apauruseya.  Members  of  the  first
group usually favor knowledge gained through their own  sensory  experience.
Yet like everyone else they constantly rely on knowledge  imparted  to  them
through sound. In our practical  day-to-day  life  we  depend  on  knowledge
transmitted  from  parents,  teachers,  books,  magazines,  TV,  radio,  and
numerous experts. Hearing  from  authorities  enhances  the  extent  of  our
learning, and if we were to dispense with it we could not  function  in  our
complex modern society. Those who consider sensory  experience  superior  to
sabda forget that we gain most of our knowledge by hearing  second  hand  or
reading, not by immediate perception. Direct experience is a great  teacher,
but it is nonetheless severely vitiated by the four human defects, and  also
by the great expenditure of time  it  takes  to  acquire  it.  Moreover,  we
cannot directly experience past or future events. So even  though  those  in
the first group actually accept the principle of sabda,  because  the  sabda
they accept imparts to them only empirical knowledge and  is  therefore  all
pauruseya, they remain  skeptical  about  the  existence  of  transcendental
reality. Ultimately, no amount of raw sensory experience or  pauruseya-sabda
can ever give us access to the transcendent, spiritual reality, for it is  a
simple  fact  that  neither  of  these  means  is  at   all   reliable   for
understanding transcendence. For that, apauruseya-sabda-pramana is our  only
hope. This  brings  us  to  the  second  group—those  who  accept  both  the
existence of a transcendental reality and  the  principle  of  hearing  from
apauruseya-sabda-pramana to learn about it. For  them,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami
elaborately explains in the next Texts what constitutes genuine  apauruseya-
sabda-pramana.
   Unlike pratyaksa, sabda is not limited in scope only to the present time.
It extends into the past and future as well. It is the  most  powerful  tool
for conveying knowledge from one person to another, especially if  they  are
greatly separated by time or space, which is almost  always  the  case  when
one  wants  to  understand  the  spiritual  realm.  For  all  these  reasons
philosophers  in  virtually  all  of  India’s  orthodox  traditions   accept
apauruseya-sabda-pramana as the flawless means for acquiring  transcendental
knowledge.
   Like other followers of India’s orthodox philosophical traditions,  Srila
Jiva Gosvami (as mentioned  above)  calls  apauruseya-sabda-pramana  equates
sabda-pramana and equates the latter with the Vedas.  The  Vedas  alone  can
deliver knowledge of the  spiritual  reality,  which  lies  beyond  all  our
sensory perception. As explained in the next Text, the Vedas are  not  human
creations: they are manifest from the Supreme Lord (vedo  narayanah  saksat;
Bhag. 6.1.40), who is free from all defects.
   In his Sarva-samvadini, while discussing the principle of  sabda-pramana,
Srila Jiva Gosvami writes:  tathapi  bhrama-pramada-vipralipsa-karanapatava-
dosa-rahita-vacanatmakah sabda eva mulam pramanam.  anyesam  prayah  purusa-
bhramadi-dosa-mayatayanyatha-pratiti-darsanena pramanam va  tad-abhaso  veti
purusair nirnetum asakyatvat  tasya  tad-abhavat.  Although  there  are  ten
means of acquiring knowledge, sabda  is  the  primary  process  because  all
other means are made unreliable by the four  human  defects.  In  all  other
processes it is difficult for an ordinary person to tell whether or not  the
knowledge gained is valid.
   Although different schools of philosophy accept various  combinations  of
the  ten  pramanas,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  follows  in  the   footsteps   of
Madhvacarya by accepting pratyaksa (direct perception), anumana  (inference)
and sabda (revealed knowledge) as the only valid  means  by  which  one  can
acquire knowledge and by subsuming the other pramanas under them.  Pratyaksa
and anumana can serve as assistants to sabda,  but  whenever  pratyaksa  and
anumana contradict sabda, we should give preference to sabda-pramana.
   Here are some scriptural references showing the importance of these three
pramanas:
   pratyaksam canumanam ca sastram ca vividhagamam
   trayam su-viditam karyam dharma-suddhim abhipsata
“A person serious about executing the responsibilities of human life  should
try to understand the three processes of direct perception,  inference,  and
hearing the various Vedic scriptures”(Manu-samhita 12.105).
   pratyaksenanumanena nigamenatma-samvida
   ady-anta-vad asaj jïatva nihsango vicared iha
“[Lord Krsna said:] ‘By direct  perception,  logical  deduction,  scriptural
testimony and personal realization one should know that  this  world  has  a
beginning and an end and so is not the ultimate  reality.  Thus  one  should
live in this world without attachment’” (Bhag. 11.28.9).
   In Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.19.17) Lord Krsna includes  aitihya  (tradition)
with sense  perception,  inference,  and  sabda  as  a  means  of  acquiring
knowledge, but in fact aitihya  is  usually  considered  a  kind  of  sabda,
although not necessarily apauruseya-sabda.
   By accepting only three of  the  ten  pramanas,  Jiva  Gosvami  does  not
exclude the other seven. His opinion is that pratyaksa, anumana,  and  sabda
include  the  other  seven  pramanas,  as  follows:   Upamana,   arthapatti,
sambhava,  and  cesta  are  varieties  of  anumana;  abhava  is  a  kind  of
pratyaksa; and arsa and aitihya are kinds of sabda.
   Next Srila Jiva Gosvami explains what process is suitable for determining
the visaya (the subject), the sambandha (the connection between  the  visaya
and the words describing it), and the prayojana (the final goal).




                            SRI TATTVA SANDARBHA


                            BY SRILA JIVA GOSWAMI


                                   [PART2]


===== TS.10 =====
NUMBER: 10
SOURCE LABEL: Text 10

tatas tani na  pramananity  anadi-siddha-sarva-purusa-paramparasu  sarva-
laukikalaukika-jïana-nidanatvad   aprakrta-vacana-laksano   veda   evasmakam
sarvatita-sarvasraya-sarvacintyascarya-svabhavam      vastu      vividisatam
pramanam.
   Consequently, for us who are  inquisitive  about  that  which  is  beyond
everything yet the support of everything—that which  is  most  inconceivable
and wondrous in nature—direct perception,  inference,  and  so  on  are  not
suitable means of gaining knowledge. For  this  purpose  the  only  suitable
means is the Vedas, the transcendental words that have been  the  source  of
all mundane and  spiritual  knowledge  passed  down  among  all  schools  of
thought in human society since time immemorial.


   COMMENTARY
   The Vedas Are the Original Source of Knowledge
   As already  noted,  direct  perception  and  inference  depend  on  sense
perception, which is limited only to empirical objects and vitiated  by  the
four human defects. Thus direct perception and inference are  inadequate  by
themselves for completely  understanding  anything  beyond  our  senses.  By
tracing the chain of causes in material creation, we can infer  deduce  that
something exists beyond our sense perception, but inference can take  us  no
further, leaving us unable to identify it; nor  can  inference  yield  valid
knowledge about abhidheya, the process for  realizing  it.  We  can  acquire
such knowledge only from revealed scripture, the Vedas, which  are  not  the
creations of mortal beings and so are free from the four  defects  of  human
nature. The Vedas appeared from the Supreme Lord at the dawn of creation,  a
fact confirmed in the Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.8):  yo  brahmanam  vidadhati
purvam yo vai vedams ca prahinoti tasmai. “That Supreme Lord created  Brahma
at the beginning of creation and  gave  him  the  Vedas.”  The  term  anadi-
siddha, as used in this Text, means that the Vedas were  not  written  at  a
particular date but exist eternally, like the Lord.  They  first  manifested
in this universe within the heart of Lord Brahma, the oldest created  being:
tene brahma hrda ya adi-kavaye (Bhag. 1.1.1); then  they  were  handed  down
through disciplic succession. The Vedas provide both material and  spiritual
knowledge. Knowledge about such common phenomena as the trees, water,  land,
and sky originally came from the Vedas, along  with  the  knowledge  of  the
divisions of duties for various people according  to  their  psycho-physical
natures. As the Manu-samhita (1.21) states:
   sarvesam tu sa namani karmani ca prthak prthak
   veda-sabdebhya evadau prthak-samsthas ca nirmame
“Lord Brahma learned the names of various objects and the duties of  various
classes of people from the words of the Vedas, and thus he  could  propagate
the manifest divisions of names and duties.”
   Over time, there developed different cultures and languages that obscured
the original Vedic culture.
   For acquiring transcendental knowledge, the Vedas (sabda-pramana) is  the
only effective means. The Vedas inform us about the soul’s existence  beyond
the body, about the planets of the spiritual world, and  about  the  Supreme
Lord, His pastimes, and other matters. All these  subjects  are  beyond  the
reach of our sensory and mental faculties.  Without  the  method  of  sabda,
such philosophers as the Buddhists  who  do  not  accept  the  Vedas  cannot
justifiably say anything positive about transcendence, let alone the way  to
attain it. Sabda-pramana is so important that although Vaisnavas count  Lord
Buddha among  the  incarnations  of  the  Lord  on  the  strength  of  Vedic
testimony, they reject His philosophy because it was  not  based  on  sabda-
pramana.
   All  orthodox  schools  of  philosophy  in  India,  whether  monistic  or
dualistic, consider the Vedas apauruseya, not written by any  mortal  being.
Many modern scholars, however, dispute the divine origin of the Vedas.  They
suggest various dates for the composition of the Vedas, and  while  most  of
them agree that the Vedas were composed  before  1500  B.C.,  they  disagree
about the exact time of their composition. They have  yet  to  arrive  at  a
definitive conclusion.
   Here Srila Jiva Gosvami says that the Vedas are beginningless and are the
source of various kinds of knowledge coming down  through  many  schools  of
thought since  time  immemorial.  The  phrase  sarva-purusa,  “all  persons”
indicates that the knowledge was passed on not  only  by  human  beings  but
also by superhuman beings, such as the  demigods  and  divine  sages.  These
traditions  of  thought  all  originate  with  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, who is infallible in all respects and thus completely untainted  by
the four human defects. Moreover, Srila Jiva Gosvami has already shown (in
   TEXT 9) how unreliable are the alternatives to the Vedic  authority.  If,
as  he  has  established,  only  apauruseya-sabda   can   give   access   to
transcendental reality, how could  the  Vedas  then  have  been  written  or
compiled by human  beings?  If  Jiva  Gosvami  allowed  that  human  authors
composed the Vedas, he would be contradicting his own previous dismissal  of
human knowledge as imperfect.
   Those scholars who contest the apauruseya origin of the  Vedas,  claiming
that they are human compilations, have no conclusive proof to back up  their
claim. Refusing to consider the Vedas' own  statements  about  their  origin
and  purpose,  these  scholars  merely  assume  that  the  Vedas   are   not
authoritative and speculate about their true origin. Their motive is  clear,
for accepting the  Vedic  version  would  put  an  end  to  the  speculative
philosophical  tradition;  it  would  oblige  them  to  accept   the   Vedic
description of ultimate reality. However, oOn account of being too  attached
to the  speculative,  or  ascending,  method  of  knowledge,  however,  such
scholars and philosophers rather insist that the Vedas are of human  origin,
regardless of their inability to produce any proof of their  claim.  Indeed,
the theory of the Vedas Vedas having a human author  composer  is  a  recent
development advocated by persons who did not come in  disciplic  succession.
They were mostly outsiders who refused to believe that  India  had  much  of
importance to offer the world in the realm of philosophy and who  had  their
own motives for minimizing the Vedic traditions.  They  certainly  were  not
impartial judges of the Vedas' origin.
   On  the  other  side,  great  scholars  and  saints  like   Sankaracarya,
Madhvacarya, Ramanujacarya, Kumarila Bhatta, and Rupa Gosvami  all  accepted
the Vedas as apauruseya and eternal. These  exalted  authorities  are  famed
for their renunciation, knowledge, and  selflessness.  Contemporary  mundane
scholars who contest the divine origin of the Vedas naturally fail to  place
their faith in the opinions of these authorities, but, as  we  have  pointed
out, such materialistic scholars are not free from ulterior motives, nor  do
their character and conduct  compare  favorably  with  those  of  the  great
acaryas.
   Another consideration, and an important one, is that the Vedas themselves
repeatedly enjoin that one who wants to understand the  spiritual  knowledge
they teach must  first  approach  a  guru  in  disciplic  succession.  Vedic
knowledge is verifiable; it is not just a collection of abstract ideas.  But
to realize the truth of Vedic knowledge one must approach a bona fide  guru.
Mundane scholars, however, tend to be proud of their textbook knowledge  and
flout this requirement, all the while considering themselves authorities  on
Vedic knowledge. In reality, by not applying themselves  to  this  knowledge
in the prescribed way they ensure that for them the door  to  its  mysteries
will  ever  remain  locked.  The  attempts  of  these  hapless  scholars  to
understand the Vedas without joining an authorized disciplic succession  are
like someone’s trying to taste honey by licking  the  outside  of  a  honey-
filled jar. Their labor is futile and their  analysis  and  conclusions  are
useless.
   By contrast, the great Vaisnava acaryas all became Vedic  authorities  by
virtue of their scrupulously following the  injunction  to  surrender  to  a
guru coming in disciplic succession. As far  as  sincerity  and  credibility
are taken into account, therefore, the evidence weighs heavily in  favor  of
the saintly acaryas. In any case, a seriously interested person  can  always
take  up  the  Vedic  process  himself  and  personally  verify  the   Vedic
conclusions. Granted, this requires some effort, and it is  of  course  much
easier to offer glib speculations  denying  the  Vedas’  authority  than  to
discipline oneself and follow their instructions. Ultimately,  however,  the
Vedas’ scholarly detractors can never prove their claims.
   And even if someone proposes that just as modern science is evolving,  so
the Vedas evolved over a period of time, then the question  arises,  Why  in
recorded history have people  stopped  making  further  refinements  in  the
Vedas? If the Vedas indeed have  a  human  source,  they  should  have  been
revised and improved  over  time,  and  new,  improved  versions  should  be
available; but this is not the case. Rather, North or South, East  or  West,
the same standard readings of the Vedas are found, and  no  older  or  newer
versions are seen anywhere. The Vedic saints  have  developed  a  meticulous
system for protecting the word order of the Vedic  texts.  Changing  even  a
single syllable is considered criminal. Thus the Vedas  are  rightly  called
sruti, or  that  which  is  heard  from  the  guru  unchanged,  with  proper
intonation and accent of the syllables.
   The Vedas are unique. Can one imagine  that  in  a  particular  field  of
science or art we will reach the apex in knowledge and produce one  standard
book accepted by all, making all other books in that field obsolete?  Is  it
conceivable that no one will make any further changes or additions  to  such
a book, and that this book will become worshipable to the people  interested
in that field? The reasonable, unbiased  answer  is  no,  and  yet  this  is
precisely the case with the Vedas, for they  are  free  of  defects,  having
emanated from the perfect source, the Supreme Personality  of  Godhead.  But
if someone says yes, then there is no reason for debate over  the  authority
of the Vedas.
   In addition to the spiritual knowledge it contains, the Vedic  literature
has references to  many  modern  scientific  achievements.  The  Vedas  have
sections on astronomy, medicine, yoga, music, drama, dance,  algebra,  civil
engineering, and so on. The list is long indeed.  These  are  all  arts  and
sciences that were practiced in India centuries before  the  dawn  of  their
modern  counterparts.  His  Divine  Grace  A.C.  Bhaktivedanta  Swami  Srila
Prabhupada writes in his introduction to Srimad-Bhagavatam,  “The  authority
of the Vedas is unchallengeable and stands without any  question  of  doubt.
The conch shell and cow dung are the bone and stool of  two  living  beings.
But because they have been recommended by the Vedas as pure,  people  accept
them as such because of the authority of the Vedas.” It has been  proven  by
scientific experiment that cow dung is antiseptic and  medicinal.  It  would
be simplistic, therefore, to brush aside the  Vedas  as  manmade.  Had  this
been the case, renowned thinkers and  powerful  logicians  like  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami and Srila Madhvacarya would have taken no stock in them.
   Still one may question the eternal nature of the  Vedas  on  the  grounds
that any scriptural references in support  of  them  will  necessarily  come
from the Vedas themselves. In logic, citing evidence that relies  on  itself
for proof of legitimacy is called circular reasoning  and  is  unacceptable.
The Vedas may thus appear tainted with this defect of svasraya,  or  begging
the question, relying as they  do  on  themselves  to  establish  their  own
authority.
   Circular reasoning would be a serious defect, but  a  closer  look  shows
that the Vedas are an exception to this fallacy.  That  the  Vedas  rely  on
themselves to establish their authority  is  not  a  defect;  rather  it  is
logical and sensible.  It  simply  affirms  their  absolute,  transcendental
nature, since if some other source were needed to confirm the  authority  of
the Vedas, the authority of that  new  source  would  surpass  that  of  the
Vedas. In such a case an inquisitive person would be obliged to discard  the
Vedas and begin all over again  analyzing  the  new  source’s  authenticity.
Before long this  new  source  would  need  confirmation  from  yet  another
source. This could go on ad infinitum. But the absence of  such  a  superior
source with reference to the Vedas shows that the authority of the Vedas  as
apauruseya-sabda-pramana is final.
   Logically, therefore, no other pramana can substantiate  the  Vedas.  And
that is why the Vedas are traditionally accepted as “mother.” When a  person
wants to know who his father is, he cannot find out  by  direct  perception,
nor by inference or deduction. To know for sure who is father is he  has  to
accept his mother’s testimony. We similarly  have  to  accept  the  revealed
knowledge of the Vedas to learn about the reality  beyond  our  sensory  and
intellectual power.
   The theories advanced by some scholars about the  Vedas’  mundane  origin
are unreliable and untenable because these scholars  have  not  studied  the
Vedas in a bona fide disciplic succession. Because  of  the  scholars’  four
human defects and  their  being  impelled  by  ulterior  motive—desires  for
degrees, reputation, research funding, and the like—divine  arrangement  has
barred them from gaining real insight into the Vedas.  These  scholars  will
readily admit that to understand any complex material subject one needs  the
help of experts in that field, but somehow they reject the  necessity  of  a
bona fide guru for understanding the Vedas. They do not  know  that  in  the
case  of  the  Vedic  literature  submission  to  a  guru  is  an   absolute
requirement. This prerequisite serves as a kind of password  protecting  the
Vedas against insincere persons who would try to exploit or refute them.  In
the Bhagavad-gita (7.25) the Supreme Lord affirms:
   naham prakasah sarvasya yoga-maya-samavrtah
   mudho ’yam nabhijanati loko mam ajam avyayam
“I am never manifest to  the  foolish  and  unintelligent.  For  them  I  am
covered by My Yogamaya, and therefore they do not know that I am unborn  and
infallible.”
   This statement is relevant both when the Lord  comes  to  this  world  in
person and when He reveals Himself in scripture.  The  Lord  has  given  the
conditioned souls the method by  which  they  can  approach  Him,  and  that
method begins with taking knowledge from a bona fide  disciplic  succession.
Those unwilling to thus qualify themselves can have no real access  to  Him,
even if they study the Vedas on their own for many lifetimes.
   In summary, owing to the absence of any conclusive  refutation  proof  of
the Vedas’ being apuruseya, authored by a mortal being,  and  by  the  logic
known as the law of the remainder  (parisesya-nyaya),  as  well  as  on  the
authority of the great acaryas and saints coming in the bona fide  disciplic
successions,  and  ultimately  by  accepting  the  testimony  of  the  Vedas
themselves, we reasonably conclude that the Vedas exist  eternally  and  are
an infallible source of knowledge.
   Next, Srila Jiva Gosvami shows that inference cannot  be  an  independent
means for understanding the Absolute Truth.


===== TS.11 =====
NUMBER: 11
SOURCE LABEL: Text 11

tac canumatam `tarkapratisthanat' ity-adau `acintyah khalu  ye  bhava  na
tams tarkena yojayet' ity-adau `sastra-yonitvat' ity-adau `srutes tu  sabda-
mulatvat' ity-adau
   pitr-deva-manusyanam
   vedas caksus tavesvara
   sreyas tv anupalabdhe ’rthe
   sadhya-sadhanayor api
   @vcontinue = ity-adau ca.
   The following scriptural statements confirm this conclusion [
   TEXT 10]:
   1. “Logic cannot provide final proof of anything” [Vedanta-sutra 2.1.11].
   2. “One should not use logic to try to understand what is  inconceivable”
[Mahabharata, Bhisma-parva 5.22].
   3. “Scriptures are  the  source  of  knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth”
[Vedanta-sutra 1.1.3].
   4. “The Vedas are the source of knowledge of the Absolute Truth” [Vedanta-
sutra 2.1.27].
   5. “O Supreme Lord, Your Veda is the supreme  eye  for  the  forefathers,
demigods, and human  beings.  By  it  they  can  understand  Your  form  and
qualities, along with the highest goal of life and the means  for  attaining
it,  none  of  which  can  be  ascertained   otherwise”   [Srimad-Bhagavatam
11.20.4].


   COMMENTARY
   The Authority of the Vedas
   Here,  using  scriptural  evidence,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  confirms   the
conclusion about inferential knowledge he  reached  in  the  previous  Text.
Having argued that logic  is  not  the  most  reliable  means  of  acquiring
knowledge, and having used  logic  to  establish  this  conclusion,  he  now
presents appropriate Vedic references as the final proof. Again, one  should
not think that Jiva Gosvami is  guilty  of  circular  reasoning  because  he
resorts to the Vedas themselves to confirm an  assertion  about  the  Vedas.
The Vedas are self-luminous like  the  sun.  Just  as  the  sun  illuminates
itself, independent of any other source of light,  so  only  the  Vedas  can
establish themselves as an infallible pramana. As explained in the  previous
Text, this self-confirmation is not  a  defect  in  the  process  of  sabda-
pramana, or verbal revelation, because if the Vedas indeed convey  knowledge
of the Absolute Truth, we can justifiably look to the  Vedas  themselves  to
confirm their own authority. And those who have approached  Vedic  knowledge
in the prescribed way have corroborated by their own  realization  that  the
Vedas do describe the Absolute Truth.
   Another consideration is that our objective is to know the  inconceivable
reality, and after analyzing all the sources of knowledge we  find  that  no
source  but  the  Vedas  affords  us  the  opportunity  for  achieving  this
objective. If all the best logicians, nuclear  physicists,  astrophysicists,
and other leaders in various  departments  of  science  and  philosophy  who
lived in the past, live in the present, and will live in  the  future  could
somehow assemble and deliberate together, they would be unable to  shed  any
light on the  nature  of  transcendence.  Any  theory  this  assembly  might
propose  would  only  be  a  subjective  speculation,  liable   to   endless
refutations and  counterrefutations.  Understanding  the  futility  of  such
endeavors, Srila Jiva Gosvami has gone directly to the heart of  the  matter
by citing Vedic authority.
   Srila Vyasadeva presented the conclusion of all the Vedas in the  concise
aphorisms of the Vedanta-sutra, also called the Brahma-sutra.  Sutra  2.1.11
is tarkapratisthanat: “Because reason has no sure basis.”  In  other  words,
logic has no absolute stance because  its  results  are  always  subject  to
revision.  Deductive  reasoning   is   based   on   human   perception   and
intelligence, which are both unreliable owing to  the  four  inherent  human
defects  mentioned  earlier.  And  since  different  people   have   varying
capacities and types of intelligence, the opinions they  derive  from  their
own  intelligence  also  vary.   Logical   reasoning   therefore   has   its
limitations; it  is  inconclusive  in  transcendental  matters  except  when
supported by the scriptures. In his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu  (1.1.46),  Srila
Rupa Gosvami quotes a verse from Bhartrhari’s Vakya-padiya  (1.34)  to  this
effect:
   yatnenapadito ’py arthah kusalair anumatrbhih
   abhiyukta-tarair anyair anyathaivopapadyate
“Expert logicians may establish their proofs with great endeavor, but  these
proofs will simply be contradicted by stronger logicians establishing  newer
conclusions.” The truth of this statement is  confirmed  in  the  fields  of
modern science and philosophy, where there is endless theorizing  about  the
origins of the universe and the meaning of life.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami also cites the Mahabharata’s claim that because  logic
is limited one  should  not  use  it  to  try  to  understand  inconceivable
realities. For example, by mere logic one will certainly fail to  understand
such childhood pastimes of Lord Krsna’s as His dama-bandhana-lila, in  which
His mother bound Him up with ropes. When mother Yasoda tried  to  tie  Krsna
to a grinding mortar, she was amazed to find that when she  joined  all  her
ropes together the new length of rope was still too  short!  Yet  the  black
thread around Krsna’s  waist  did  not  break,  nor  did  His  waist  become
inflated. Such inconceivable behavior by the  Absolute  Person  is  entirely
beyond the reach of all logical faculties; one can  understand  it  only  by
accepting the authority of Vedic testimony, sabda-pramana.
   Still, although logical reasoning is not a reliable independent method in
the quest for knowledge of the absolute, this does not  mean  all  logic  is
useless. The very idea that logic is not  fully  reliable  is  itself  known
through the use of logic supported by scripture.  We  should  certainly  use
our reason in trying to understand the statements of the Vedas.  The  Brhad-
aranyaka Upanisad (2.4.5) thus  states,  atma  va  are  drastavyah  srotavyo
mantavyo nididhyasitavyo maitreyi: “The Self, my dear  Maitreyi,  should  be
realized, and so  it  should  be  heard  about,  reflected  on,  and  deeply
meditated on.” Here the word mantavyah refers to logical  understanding.  We
should apply logic to properly understand  the  Vedic  injunctions,  but  we
should reject logic that runs counter to their conclusions. Mere  logic  can
never supersede the opinions of the Vedas,  which  are  free  of  the  human
defects.
   While discussing this topic in his Sarva-samvadini,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami
quotes the Kurma Purana:
   purvaparavirodhena ko ’nv artho ’bhimato bhavet
   ity-adyam uhanam tarkah suska-tarkam tu varjayet
“Conjecturing about the meaning of a scriptural passage by referring to  the
statements preceding and following it is called  proper  logic.  One  should
abandon dry logic, however.”
   We find excellent examples of dry logic among  speculative  philosophers.
These thinkers generally use their reason to prove a  preconceived  opinion,
and in their stubbornness they of course fail to maintain  any  objectivity.
They  disregard  scriptural  injunctions   that   do   not   support   their
conclusions. They have no success  in  applying  their  method  to  ultimate
matters because no one can penetrate the inconceivable transcendental  plane
by any amount of speculation. Such persons’  interest  in  philosophy  is  a
futile mental exercise with no tangible result. No matter how  profound  and
mesmerizing  their  vision,  it  is  inevitable  that  some  other  powerful
logician will eventually defeat them.  The  Vedas  enjoin,  therefore,  that
those who seek the Absolute Truth should abandon  dry  logic,  but  not  all
logic. Indeed, in the Bhagavad-gita  (10.32)  Lord  Krsna  Himself  declares
that logic aimed at  understanding  the  Absolute  as  it  is  presented  in
scripture is one of His opulences: vadah pravadatam aham.  ”Among  logicians
I am the conclusive truth.” Thus Srila Jiva Gosvami is  right  in  accepting
anumana as one of the principal means of gaining valid knowledge.
   ’’’Jiva Gosvami next cites two more  Brahma-sutras  (1.1.3  and  2.1.27),
which state emphatically that one can understand  the  Absolute  Truth  only
from the revealed scriptures. He then  concludes  by  quoting  from  Srimad-
Bhagavatam to show that not only human beings but even superhumans like  the
demigods  need  the  Vedas’  help.  Thus  he   emphasizes   the   need   for
everyone—humans, subhumans, and superhumans—to rely  on  the  Vedas  as  the
flawless means for understanding the Absolute Truth.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami begins his demonstration  that  the  Puranas  are
even more important for us than the Vedas.


===== TS.12 =====
NUMBER: 12
SOURCE LABEL: Text 12

tatra ca veda-sabdasya samprati dusparatvad duradhigamarthatvac  ca  tad-
artha-nirnayakanam  muninam  api  paraspara-virodhad   veda-rupo   vedartha-
nirnayakas cetihasa-puranatmakah sabda eva vicaraniyah. tatra ca yo va veda-
sabdo  natma-viditah  so  ’pi  tad-drstyanumeya  eveti   samprati   tasyaiva
pramotpadakatvam sthitam.
   But at present it is difficult to study the Vedas in their entirety or to
understand them. In addition, the great thinkers who have commented  on  the
Vedas interpret them in contradictory ways. We should  therefore  study  the
Itihasas and Puranas, since they are Vedic in nature and are  conclusive  in
determining the Vedas’ meaning. Moreover, with the help of the Itihasas  and
Puranas we can infer the meaning of the unavailable portions of  the  Vedas.
Thus at present only the Itihasas and  Puranas  constitute  the  appropriate
source of valid knowledge.


   TEXT 12.2
   tatha   hi   mahabharate   manaviye   ca    `itihasa-puranabhyam    vedam
samupabrmhayet' iti `puranat puranam'  iti  canyatra.  na  cavedena  vedasya
brmhanam sambhavati na hy  aparipurnasya  kanaka-valayasya  trapuna  puranam
yujyate.
   This is why the Mahabharata [Adi-parva  1.267]  and  Manu-samhita  state,
“One should complement one’s understanding of the Vedas  with  the  help  of
the Itihasas and Puranas.” And elsewhere it  is  stated,  “The  Puranas  are
called by that name because they complete (purana).” One should not  try  to
“complete” or explain the meaning of the Vedas with something  that  is  not
Vedic in nature, just as one should not finish an incomplete  gold  bracelet
with lead.


   TEXT 12.3
   nanu yadi veda-sabdah puranam  itihasam  copadatte  tarhi  puranam  anyad
anvesaniyam. yadi tu  na  na  tarhitihasa-puranayor  abhedo  vedena.  ucyate
visistaikartha-pratipadaka-pada-kadambasyapauruseyatvad  abhede  ’pi  svara-
krama-bhedad bheda-nirdeso ’py upapadyate.
   But, one may object, if the Itihasas and Puranas are actually included as
part of the
   TEXT of the Vedas, we need to identify some other Puranas than  those  we
are familiar with; otherwise the Itihasas and Puranas would not  qualify  as
nondifferent from the Vedas [but  would  rather  be  wholly  identical  with
them].
   To this we reply that the Itihasas and Puranas are nondifferent from  the
Vedas inasmuch as both kinds of literary works  have  no  human  author  and
present the same detailed knowledge. Nonetheless, there is  some  difference
between them with regard to intonation and word order.


   TEXT 12.4
   rg-adibhih  samam  anayor  apauruseyatvenabhedo  madhyandina-srutav   eva
vyajyate `evam va are ’sya mahato  bhutasya  nihsvasitam  etad  yad  rg-vedo
yajur-vedah sama-vedo ’tharvangirasa itihasah puranam' ity-adina.


   The Madhyandina-sruti [Brhad-aranyaka Up. 2.4.10] implies the oneness  of
the Itihasas and Puranas with the  Rg  and  other  Vedas  in  terms  of  the
apauruseya nature all these works share: “My dear Maitreyi, the  Rg,  Yajur,
Sama, and Atharva Vedas, as well as the Itihasas  and  Puranas,  all  appear
from the breathing of the Supreme Being.”


   COMMENTARY
   Difficulties in Studying the Vedas
   In the previous  Texts  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  has  established  that  the
Vedas—Rg, Yajur, Sama, and Atharva—constitute the valid means  of  acquiring
knowledge about the Supreme. Here he points out the  practical  difficulties
involved with studying them nowadays.
   The first difficulty is the unavailability of the complete
   TEXT of the Vedas. Originally the Veda was one, and at the advent of  the
current age, Kali-yuga, Srila Vyasadeva  divided  it  into  four:  vyadadhad
yajïa-santatyai vedam ekam catur-vidham (Bhag. 1.4.19). Then,  as  explained
in the Kurma Purana (52.19–20), Vyasadeva’s followers  further  divided  the
four Vedas into 1,130 branches:
   eka-vimsati-bhedena rg-vedam krtavan pura
   sakhanam tu satenaiva yajur-vedam athakarot
   @vp=
   sama-vedam sahasrena sakhanam prabibheda sah
   atharvanam atho vedam bibheda navakena tu
   “Formerly the Rg Veda was divided into 21 branches, the Yajur  Veda  into
100 branches, the Sama Veda into 1,000 branches, and the Atharva  Veda  into
9 branches.” Each of these  branches  has  4  subdivisions  called  Samhita,
Brahmana, Aranyaka, and Upanisad. So  all  together  the  Vedas  consist  of
1,130 Samhitas, 1,130 Brahmanas, 1,130 Aranyakas,  and  1,130  Upanisads,  a
total of 4,520 titles. By the influence of time, however,  many  texts  have
been lost. At present only about 11 Samhitas,  18  Brahmanas,  7  Aranyakas,
and 220 Upanisads are available.  This  constitutes  less  than  6%  of  the
original Vedas.
   The second difficulty one faces in trying to  study  the  Vedas  concerns
their language. There are two varieties of Sanskrit, vaidika  (“Vedic”)  and
laukika (“worldly” or “ordinary”), and the Vedas contain  only  the  former.
Years of study are required to become an accomplished  scholar  of  ordinary
Sanskrit, but if such a scholar wishes to understand Vedic Sanskrit  he  has
to learn extra rules of  grammar  and  a  different  vocabulary,  which  may
require years of additional study. And even when the language of  the  Vedic
verses is fathomed, these verses are so cryptic  that  one  cannot  possibly
decipher them without  hearing  them  explained  by  a  bona  fide  guru  in
disciplic succession.
   Another difficulty: Even before studying the Vedas one must  study  their
six corollaries, or “limbs,” called Vedangas. These  six  limbs  are  siksa,
the science of pronunciation; kalpa, the process  of  performing  sacrifice;
vyakarana, the rules of grammar; nirukta, the meanings  and  derivations  of
difficult words used in the Vedas; jyotisa,  astronomy  and  astrology;  and
chandas, Vedic meters.  Each  of  these  limbs  is  extensive  and  requires
serious study.
   To further complicate matters, with the advent of Kali-yuga human  memory
has grown weaker. In former times there  were  no  books:  a  student  could
assimilate all knowledge from his spiritual master  simply  by  hearing  and
remembering. But this is no longer possible. In this age  the  food,  water,
air, and even the very ether are all polluted, and all  these  factors  have
taken their toll on human memory, making it  difficult  to  study  even  the
available 6% of the Vedic texts, what to speak of the entire four Vedas  and
their branches. Srila Jiva Gosvami therefore  concludes  that  although  the
four Vedas are perfect sabda-pramana, in the present age it  is  impractical
to study them thoroughly and thereby ascertain the Absolute Truth.
   As an alternative, someone may suggest that since only a few of the Vedas
are available and even they are difficult  to  understand,  why  not  simply
study the Vedanta-sutra, the definitive summary of  the  Vedic  conclusions?
To this Jiva Gosvami replies that various thinkers differ about the  meaning
of the Vedanta-sutra and so this method will likely just lead to  confusion.
Furthermore, important thinkers like Gautama, Kapila, and Jaimini adhere  to
other philosophies, so why should we accept only Vedanta rather than one  of
their theories?
   For all these reasons we must admit that even with the help of the  Vedas
and Vedanta we will not be able  to  understand  sambandha,  abhidheya,  and
prayojana.  To  solve  this  dilemma  Srila   Jiva   Gosvami   proposes   an
alternative: study of the Itihasas and Puranas.
   The Itihasas and Puranas are easier to understand than the Vedas  because
they are written in  laukika  Sanskrit,  which  is  used  in  regular  human
discourse, rather than  Vedic  Sanskrit,  which  is  not.  Furthermore,  the
esoteric meanings of the Vedas are  more  accessible  in  the  Itihasas  and
Puranas because these works are narrated in story  form.  And  whereas  only
the dvijas, the twice-born Vedic  initiates,  are  permitted  to  study  the
Vedas, that restriction does not apply to the  study  of  the  Itihasas  and
Puranas; anyone may read them. Even  the  Puranas’  original  speaker,  Suta
Gosvami, was not a twice-born brahmana. The Itihasas and Puranas convey  the
same conclusions as the Vedas, and since they come  from  the  same  source,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are also free from the  four  human
defects and thus qualify as perfect sabda-pramana. The Itihasas and  Puranas
should therefore be considered as reliable as the four Vedas.
   But although the Itihasas and Puranas are one with the Vedas,  this  does
not mean they  are  literally  identical  with  them.  Otherwise  the  words
Itihasa and Purana would simply be names for certain special  parts  of  the
Vedas. The Vedas are written in Vedic Sanskrit, which  necessarily  involves
three different tone  accents—udatta  (high),  svarita  (intermediate),  and
anudatta (low). In the Vedic language one word can actually  be  changed  to
another if the accent is changed. We see an example of this in  the  history
of the demon Vrtra, who was created by the chanting of  a  mantra  during  a
sacrifice. This demon was supposed to kill Indra, but during  the  sacrifice
the priests pronounced the mantra indra-satro  vivardhasva  with  the  wrong
accent. The result was just the opposite of what was intended: Indra  killed
Vrtrasura.
   Another significant difference between the four Vedas  and  the  Itihasas
and Puranas is the sequence of particular words, which is rigidly  fixed  in
the Vedas. No one should change even one syllable of the Vedic texts,  which
have maintained their primeval arrangement of words since the  beginning  of
creation. Techniques have been devised,  such  as  pada-patha,  krama-patha,
ghana-patha, and jata-patha, for keeping the word order  intact.  But  while
no rewording or  rearrangement  of  words  is  allowed  in  the  Vedas,  the
Itihasas and Puranas need not be so rigidly preserved: their exact  wordings
are allowed to vary in different yuga cycles. Because no special  techniques
are used to keep the word order of the Puranas and Itihasas intact, we  find
slight differences from edition to edition.
   Srila Vyasa compiled the Itihasa called Mahabharata for  people  of  this
age specifically because they are not qualified  to  understand  the  Vedas.
This is explained in Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.4.25):
   stri-sudra-dvija-bandhunam trayi na sruti-gocara
   karma-sreyasi mudhanam sreya eva bhaved iha
   iti bharatam akhyanam krpaya munina krtam
“Out of compassion, the sage thought it wise  to  do  something  that  would
enable those who were ignorant of how  to  act  for  their  own  welfare  to
achieve the ultimate goal of life. Thus he  compiled  the  great  historical
narration called the Mahabharata for women, laborers,  and  friends  of  the
twice-born because they do not have access to the Vedas.”
   Srila Jiva Gosvami says that the Puranas are called so because they  make
the Vedas complete. Does he mean the  Vedas  are  incomplete?  No,  but  the
Puranas are a form of explanatory, supplementary  literature  that  help  us
understand the terse, cryptic message of the Vedas.  Like  the  Vedas,  they
convey knowledge  of  the  Absolute  Truth,  and  to  do  so  they  must  be
transcendental like the Vedas. The Skanda  Purana  (4.95.12)  indicates  the
equal transcendental status of the Puranas, Itihasas, and Vedas as follows:
   vede ramayane caiva purane bharate tatha
   adav ante ca madhye ca harih sarvatra giyate
“In the Vedas, Ramayana, Puranas, and Mahabharata  Lord  Hari  is  glorified
everywhere—in the beginning, middle, and end.”
   The conclusion is that because the Itihasas and Puranas emanate from  the
same source as the four Vedas and have  the  same  purport,  they  are  also
equally authoritative.
   Next Srila Jiva Gosvami explains more about how the Itihasas and  Puranas
are not inferior to the Vedas.


===== TS.13 =====
NUMBER: 13
SOURCE LABEL: Text 13

ata eva skande prabhasa-khande
   pura tapas cacarogram amaranam pitamahah
   avirbhutas tato vedah sa-sad-anga-pada-kramah
   @V1=
   tatah puranam akhilam sarva-sastra-mayam dhruvam
   nitya-sabda-mayam punyam sata-koti-pravistaram
   nirgatam brahmano vaktrat tasya bhedan nibodhata
   @VCONTINUE brahmam puranam prathamam ity-adi.
   The Prabhasa-khanda of the Skanda Purana [2.3.5] therefore states:
   “Long ago, Lord Brahma, the grandfather of the demigods, performed severe
penances, and  as  a  result  the  Vedas  appeared,  along  with  their  six
supplements and their pada and krama texts. Then the entire Purana  emanated
from his mouth. Composed of eternal sound  and  consisting  of  one  billion
verses, it is the unchanging,  sacred  embodiment  of  all  scriptures.  You
should know that of the various divisions of this Purana, the Brahma  Purana
is the first.”


   TEXT 13.2
   atra sata-koti-sankhya brahma-loke prasiddheti  tathoktam  trtiya-skandhe
ca `rg-yajuh-samatharvakhyan vedan purvadibhir mukhaih' ity-adi-prakarane
   itihasa-puranani païcamam vedam isvarah
   sarvebhya eva vaktrebhyah sasrje sarva-darsanah
   @VCONTINUE  =  ity   api   catra   saksad   eva   veda-sabdah   prayuktah
puranetihasayoh.
   The figure one billion cited here refers to the number of verses existing
in  Brahma’s  domain.  Srimad-Bhagavatam’s  Third  Canto  gives  a   similar
description in the passage starting with the words  rg-yajuh-samatharvakhyan
vedan purvadibhir  mukhair:  “Beginning  from  the  front  face  of  Brahma,
gradually the four  Vedas—Rg,  Yajur,  Sama,  and  Atharva—became  manifest”
[Bhag. 3.12.37]. In this passage we find the statement “Then Brahma  created
the fifth Veda—the Puranas and the histories—from all his mouths,  since  he
could see all the past, present, and future” [Bhag. 3.12.39]. Here the  word
veda is used specifically in reference to the Itihasas and Puranas.


   TEXT 13.3
   anyatra ca `puranam païcamo vedah'
   itihasah puranam ca païcamo veda ucyate
   vedan adhyapayam asa mahabharata-païcaman
   @VCONTINUE  =  ity-adau.   anyatha   vedan   ity-adav   api   païcamatvam
navakalpyeta samana-jatiya-nivesitatvat sankhyayah.
   And elsewhere it is said, “The Puranas are the fifth Veda,” “The Itihasas
and Puranas are called the fifth Veda” [Bhag. 1.4.20], and  “He  taught  the
Vedas along with the fifth of their number, the Mahabharata”  [M.Bh.  Moksa-
dharma 340.21].
   If  the  Itihasas  and  Puranas  were  not  Vedic,  it  would  have  been
inappropriate for the preceding verses to include them as  the  fifth  Veda,
since normally one counts together only objects of the same kind.


   TEXT 13.4
   bhavisya-purane `karsnam ca païcamam vedam yan mahabharatam smrtam'  iti.
tatha ca sama-kauthumiya-sakhayam  chandogyopanisadi  ca  `rg-vedam  bhagavo
’dhyemi  yajur-vedam  sama-vedam  atharvanam  caturtham   itihasam   puranam
païcamam vedanam vedam' ity-adi.
   Also, the Bhavisya Purana states, “The fifth Veda, written by Sri  Krsna-
dvaipayana Vyasa, is called the Mahabharata.”
   Another reference is found in the Chandogya Upanisad  of  the  Kauthumiya
school of the Sama Veda: “Venerable sir,  I  have  studied  the  Rg,  Yajur,
Sama, and Atharva Vedas, and also the Itihasas and Puranas,  which  are  the
fifth Veda” [Kauthumiya Chandogya Up. 7.1.2].


   TEXT 13.5
   ata  eva  `asya  mahato  bhutasya'  ity-adav  itihasa-puranayos  caturnam
evantar-bhutatva-kalpanaya  prasiddha-pratyakhyanam  nirastam.   tad   uktam
`brahmam puranam prathamam' ity-adi.
   Thus is refuted the frequently raised objection  that  the  Itihasas  and
Puranas, said in the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad to emanate from the  breath  of
the Supreme Being, are included in the four  Vedas  and  therefore  have  no
separate existence. The same is stated in the words “Brahma  Purana  is  the
first.<193>” [Skanda Pur.].




   COMMENTARY
   The Itihasas and Puranas Are Vedic
   To substantiate the statement from the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad quoted in
   TEXT 12.4 (B.a. Up. 2.4.10), which establishes the Vedic  nature  of  the
Itihasas and Puranas, Srila Jiva Gosvami here cites more evidence  from  the
Puranas, Itihasas, and Upanisads. From these  references  the  following  is
clear: The Puranas and Itihasas have the same source as the four  Vedas  and
are in fact called the fifth Veda.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami  here  refers  to  the  frequent  objection  that  the
Itihasas and Puranas cannot be the fifth Veda because they are part  of  the
four Vedas. While explaining the above-mentioned statement from  the  Brhad-
aranyaka Upanisad, some followers of the Mimamsaka  school  claim  that  the
words Itihasa and Purana refer to historical passages found  in  some  parts
of the Vedas and  not  to  separate  works.  Examples  of  sruti  statements
sometimes considered Puranic are yato va imani bhutani jayante  (“from  whom
these beings take  birth”;  Taittiriya  Up.  3.1)  and  sa  brahmana  srjati
rudrena vilapayati harir adir anadih (“Lord Hari creates through Brahma  and
destroys through Rudra, but He Himself is the beginingless source of  all”).
These and similar passages are referred to as  "Purana"  because  they  deal
with creation and destruction, which are among the subjects treated  in  the
Puranas.
   Mimamsakas further argue that  over  an  immense  period  many  of  these
original Puranic portions of the Vedas were lost  and  those  that  remained
became difficult to understand. Therefore,  the  Mimamsakas  propose,  Srila
Vyasa mercifully wrote new Itihasas and  Puranas  for  the  benefit  of  the
unintelligent people of Kali-yuga, and this is what is described in  Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.4.25). Hence the Itihasas and Puranas mentioned in the  Brhad-
aranyaka Upanisad  are  part  of  the  Vedas,  not  independent  books,  and
therefore it is incorrect to conclude that they are the fifth Veda. This  is
the Mimamsakas’ argument.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami refutes this argument with references from  the  Vedas
and also from the Itihasas and Puranas themselves. These  citations  confirm
the Itihasas’ and Puranas’ status as the fifth  Veda  on  the  grounds  that
they emanated separately from Lord Brahma’s mouths. If they were only  parts
of the Vedas, there would be no reason for  these  authoritative  scriptures
to call them the fifth Veda. Moreover, there are many statements  about  the
apauruseya, Vedic nature of the Itihasas and Puranas in the Vedic  Samhitas,
Brahmanas, Aranyakas, Upanisads,  Kalpa-sutras,  Dharma-sutras,  and  Grhya-
sutras, as well as in the Puranas, Itihasas, and  other  smrti  texts.  Here
are a few of these statements:
   rcah samani chandamsi puranam yajusa saha
   ucchistaj jajïire sarve divi deva divi-sritah
“The Rg, Sama, Yajur, and Atharva  Vedas  appeared  from  the  Supreme  Lord
along with the Puranas  and  all  the  demigods  residing  in  the  heavenly
planets” (Atharva Veda 11.7.24).
   sa brhatim disam anu vyacalat  tam  itihasas  ca  puranam  ca  gathas  ca
itihasasya ca sa vai puranasya ca gathanam ca narasamsinam ca  priyam  dhama
bhavati ya evam veda.
“He approached the Brhati meter, and thus  the  Itihasas,  Puranas,  Gathas,
and Narasamsis became favorable to him. One who knows  this  verily  becomes
the  beloved  abode  of  the  Itihasas,  Puranas,  Gathas,  and  Narasamsis”
(Atharva Veda 15.6.10, 12).
   evam  ime  sarve  veda  nirmitah   sa-kalpah   sa-rahasyah   sa-brahmanah
sopanisatkah setihasah sanvakhyatah sa-puranah.
“In this way all the Vedas were manifested along with the kalpas,  rahasyas,
Brahmanas,  Upanisads,  Itihasas,   anvakhyatas,   and   Puranas”   (Gopatha
Brahmana, Purva 2.10).
   nama va rg-vedo yajur-vedah sama-veda atharvanas caturtha itihasa-puranah
païcamo vedanam vedah.
“Indeed Rg, Yajur, Sama, and Atharva are the names of the  four  Vedas.  The
Itihasas and Puranas are the fifth Veda” (Chandogya Up. 7.1.4).
   mimamsate ca yo vedan sadbhir angaih sa-vistaraih
   itihasa-puranani sa bhaved veda-para-gah
“One who thoroughly studies the Vedas along with their  six  limbs  and  the
Itihasas and Puranas becomes  a  true  knower  of  the  Vedas”  (Vyasa-smrti
4.45).
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami explains why the Itihasas and Puranas are counted
as the fifth Veda.




                              TATTVA SANDARBHA


                            BY SRILA JIVA GOSWAMI


                                   [PART3]


===== TS.14 =====
NUMBER: 14
SOURCE LABEL: Text 14

païcamatve karanam ca vayu-purane suta-vakyam
   itihasa-purananam vaktaram samyag eva hi
   mam caiva pratijagraha bhagavan isvarah prabhuh


   eka asid yajur-vedas tam caturdha vyakalpayat
   caturhotram abhut tasmims tena yajïam akalpayat


   adhvaryavam yajurbhis tu rgbhir hotram tathaiva ca
   audgatram samabhis caiva brahmatvam capy atharvabhih


   akhyanais capy upakhyanair gathabhir dvija-sattamah
   purana-samhitas cakre puranartha-visaradah


   yac chistam tu yajur-veda iti sastrartha-nirnayah
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   In the Vayu Purana  [60.16–18,  21–22]  Suta  Gosvami  explains  why  the
Itihasas and Puranas are considered the fifth Veda:
   “Srila Vyasadeva, the almighty Supreme Lord, accepted me  [Suta  Gosvami]
as the qualified speaker of the  Itihasas  and  Puranas.  In  the  beginning
there was only one Veda, the Yajur Veda,  which  Srila  Vyasa  divided  into
four parts. These gave rise to the four activities  called  catur-hotra,  by
means of which Srila Vyasa arranged for the performance of sacrifice.
   “The adhvaryu  priests  carry  out  their  responsibilities  with  yajur-
mantras, the hota priests with rg-mantras, the  udgata  priests  with  sama-
mantras, and the brahma priests with atharva-mantras.”
   Suta Gosvami further states:
   “O best of the twice-born, thereafter Srila Vyasa,  who  best  knows  the
meaning of the Puranas, compiled them and the Itihasas by combining  various
akhyanas, upakhyanas, and gathas. Whatever remained after Vyasa divided  the
Vedas into four parts was also Yajur Veda. This is  the  conclusion  of  the
scriptures.”


   TEXT 14.2
   brahma-yajïadhyayane ca viniyogo drsyate  ’misam  `yad  brahmananitihasa-
puranani' iti. so ’pi navedatve sambhavati. ato yad aha bhagavan matsye
   kalenagrahanam matva puranasya dvijottamah
   vyasa-rupam aham krtva samharami yuge yuge
   @VCONTINUE   =   iti   purva-siddham   eva   puranam   sukha-sangrahanaya
sankalayamiti tatrarthah.
   The Puranas are also used in the formal study of the Vedas called brahma-
yajïa: “The Itihasas and Puranas are Vedas” [Taittiriya  Aranyaka  2.9].  If
the Itihasas and Puranas were not Vedic, they would not be used this way  in
the brahma-yajïa.
   In the Matsya Purana [53.8] the Supreme Lord says, “O best of the  twice-
born, foreseeing that the Purana will gradually be neglected, in  every  age
I assume the form of Vyasa and abridge it.”  This  means  that  Srila  Vyasa
condenses the already existing Purana so that people can  easily  comprehend
it.


   TEXT 14.3
   tad-anantaram hy uktam
   catur-laksa-pramanena dvapare dvapare sada
   tad astadasadha krtva bhur-loke ’smin prabhasyate


   adyapy amartya-loke tu sata-koti-pravistaram
   tad-artho ’tra catur-laksah sanksepena nivesitah
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   The Matsya Purana [53.9–11] continues by saying, “The  Purana  consisting
of four hundred thousand verses is divided into  eighteen  parts,  in  which
form it is passed on by oral recitation here  on  earth  in  every  Dvapara-
yuga. Even today the original Purana of one billion  verses  exists  in  the
worlds of the demigods. The essential meaning of that  Purana  is  contained
in the abridged version of four hundred thousand verses.”


   TEXT 14.4
   atra tu `yac chistam tu yajur-vedah'  ity  uktatvat  tasyabhidheya-bhagas
catur-laksas tv atra martya-loke sanksepena sara-sangrahena nivesito  na  tu
racanantarenety arthah.
   Suta’s statement [quoted in
   TEXT 14.1] that “whatever remained after Vyasa  divided  the  Vedas  into
four parts was also Yajur Veda” indicates that the essence of  the  original
Purana formed the abridged version of four hundred thousand  verses  in  the
world of mortals. It is not a different composition.


   COMMENTARY
   The Itihasas and Puranas Are the Fifth Veda
   The Itihasas and Puranas are called  the  fifth  Veda  because  they  are
derived from the original Veda, the Yajur Veda. This  is  explained  in  the
section of the Vayu Purana that describes  the  catur-hotra  priests.  There
are four kinds of rtviks, or priests, needed to perform a  Vedic  sacrifice,
and their duties were originally all known from the Yajur  Veda.  But  later
on the  Veda  was  divided  into  four  parts  for  easy  understanding  and
application. The duties of the  four  priests—adhvaryu,  udgata,  hota,  and
brahma—are known  from  each  of  these  four  divisions.  The  adhvaryu  is
associated with the Yajur Veda,  and  his  duties  include  sanctifying  the
sacrificial  paraphernalia  and  measuring  the  shape  and  size   of   the
sacrificial arena. The udgata priest studies the Sama Veda and chants  hymns
during the sacrifice to propitiate the Lord. The hota priest  decorates  the
altar, invokes the demigods, pours oblations, and chants the  Rg  Veda.  The
brahma priest is a student of the Atharva Veda and acts  as  the  supervisor
and coordinator of sacrificial ceremonies.
   After Srila Vyasa compiled the  four  Vedas,  there  still  remained  one
billion verses from  the  original  Yajur  Veda.  These  verses  became  the
original Purana, which is still available on the heavenly  planets.  Out  of
compassion for the people of Kali-yuga,  Vyasadeva  extracted  five  hundred
thousand essential verses from this original Purana. Four  hundred  thousand
of these He divided into the eighteen Puranas. The remaining  verses  formed
the Itihasa called  Mahabharata.  The  Itihasa  and  Puranas  are  therefore
called the fifth Veda because they were produced  from  the  original  Veda.
Another reason the Puranas and  Itihasas  are  considered  the  fifth  Veda,
distinct from the other four, is that the priests of the four Vedas  do  not
use the Puranas and Itihasas in sacrificial ceremonies,  even  though  these
works are studied along with the Vedas.
   In his
   COMMENTARY  on the Visnu Purana (3.6.16), Srila  Sridhara  Svami  defines
the terms akhyana, upakhyana, and gatha:
   svayam-drstartha-kathanam prahur akhyanakam budhah
   srutasyarthasya kathanam upakhyanam pracaksate
   gathas tu pitr-prthivy-adi-gitayah
“An akhyana is a narration of something witnessed by the speaker,  while  an
upakhyana is a narration of something the  speaker  has  not  witnessed  but
rather heard about. Gathas are  songs  about  the  forefathers  and  earthly
beings.”
   The words yac chistam tu yajur-vedah (“The remaining part was also called
Yajur Veda”; Vayu Pur. 60.16.22) signify that the Itihasas and  Puranas  are
apauruseya, not composed by any mortal; thus they have  the  same  authority
as the Vedas, having been compiled by Srila Vyasa from  the  Supreme  Lord’s
very breath. While compiling the Puranas and Itihasas He  included  some  of
His own statements to make the narration  more  easily  comprehensible.  For
example, in the Bhagavad-gita the words “Arjuna said” and “Krsna  said”  are
added by Srila Vyasa to help  the  reader  understand.  But  we  should  not
consider even these added statements  to  have  been  written  by  a  mortal
being, since Vyasa is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord.  This  is  evident
from the verse of the Matsya Purana quoted in the text.
   Someone might raise the objection that from the  Brhad-aranyaka  Upanisad
(2.4.10) it is clear that the four  Vedas  individually  appeared  from  the
Supreme Lord. Why, then, is it said that  Vyasadeva  divided  the  one  Veda
into four parts? We reply that while it is true that each Veda  individually
emanated from the Lord, originally all four Vedas were  collectively  called
the Yajur Veda because that Veda  is  much  larger  than  the  other  three.
Generally, the largest member of a set  can  represent  the  whole  set.  In
Sanskrit this is called adhikyena vyapadesa bhavanti, or the  law  that  the
largest constituent represents the whole. A herd of cows  with  just  a  few
buffaloes in it is still called a herd of cows, and  the  four  fingers  and
one thumb are usually called the five fingers. Because the  four  Vedas  had
become disordered, Sri Vyasa rearranged the  Vedic  texts  to  help  clearly
define the duties of the four sacrificial  priests.  How  the  Vedas  became
mixed up because of a curse by Gautama Rsi will be told in
   TEXT 16.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami further substantiates his  conclusion  about  the
Vedic nature of the Itihasas and Puranas, and he also explains  the  meaning
of the name Veda-vyasa.


===== TS.15 =====
NUMBER: 15
SOURCE LABEL: Text 15

tathaiva darsitam veda-saha-bhavena siva-puranasya vayaviya-samhitayam
   sanksipya caturo vedams caturdha vyabhajat prabhuh
   vyasta-vedataya khyato veda-vyasa iti smrtah


   puranam api sanksiptam catur-laksa-pramanatah
   adyapy amartya-loke tu sata-koti-pravistaram
   @VCONTINUE = iti. sanksiptam ity atra teneti sesah.
   Similarly, the Vayaviya-samhita of the Siva Purana  indicates  the  Vedic
nature of the Puranas by discussing their appearance along with the Vedas:
   “The ingenious Lord abridged the Veda and then divided it  [vyasta]  into
four. Therefore He became  known  as  Veda-vyasa.  He  also  summarized  the
Puranas in four hundred thousand verses, but in the  heavenly  planets  they
still comprise one billion verses” [Siva Pur. 7.1.1.37–38].
   Here the word sanksiptam (“condensed”) implies “condensed by Him.”


   TEXT 15.2
   skandam agneyam ity-adi-samakhyas tu pravacana-nibandhanah  kathakadi-vad
anupurvi-nirmana-nibandhana  va.   tasmat   kvacid   anityatva-sravanam   tv
avirbhava-tirobhavapeksaya. tad evam itihasa-puranayor vedatvam siddham.
   The name of a Purana—Skanda, Agni,  and  so  on—refers  to  its  original
speaker, as with the Katha Upanisad,  which  was  promulgated  by  the  sage
Katha. Or else the name refers to  the  person  who  arranged  the  Purana’s
contents. The reason the Puranas are occasionally described  as  impermanent
is that they are sometimes manifest and sometimes not.
   In this way [by the arguments and evidence provided in Texts 13, 14,  and
15.1–2] the Vedic nature of the Itihasas and Puranas is established.


   TEXT 15.3
   tathapi sutadinam adhikarah sakala-nigama-valli-sat-phala-Sri-krsna-nama-
vat. yathoktam prabhasa-khande
   @VL1 = madhura-madhuram etan mangalam mangalanam
   @VL2 = sakala-nigama-valli-sat-phalam cit-svarupam
   @VL1 = sakrd api parigitam sraddhaya helaya va
   @VL2 = bhrgu-vara nara-matram tarayet krsna-nama
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   Yet Suta and others who are not twice-born are qualified  to  recite  the
Puranas in the same way  that  every  person  is  qualified  to  chant  Lord
Krsna’s holy name, the transcendental  fruit  of  the  creeper  of  all  the
Vedas. As stated in the Prabhasa-khanda [of the Skanda Purana]:
   “O best of the Bhrgu dynasty, the holy name of Krsna is the  sweetest  of
the  sweet  and  the  most  auspicious  of  the  auspicious.   It   is   the
transcendental  fruit  of  all  the  Vedas  and  is  purely  spiritual   and
conscious. Whoever chants it but once, whether with faith or with  contempt,
is liberated.”


   TEXT 15.4
   yatha coktam visnu-dharme
   rg-vedo ’tha yajur-vedah sama-vedo ’py atharvanah
   adhitas tena yenoktam harir ity aksara-dvayam
   @VCONTINUE = iti. atha vedartha-nirnayakatvam ca vaisnave
   bharata-vyapadesena hy amnayarthah pradarsitah
   vedah pratisthitah sarve purane natra samsayah
   @VCONTINUE = ity-adau.
   The Visnu-dharma Purana states:
   “A person who chants the two syllables ha-ri has  already  completed  the
study of the Rg, Yajur, Sama, and Atharva Vedas.”
   And the Visnu Purana affirms that the Puranas and Itihasas establish  the
meaning of the Vedas:
   “On the pre
   TEXT of writing the Mahabharata, Srila Vyasa  has  explained  the  Vedas’
meaning. Without doubt  all  the  ideas  of  the  Vedas  are  given  a  firm
foundation in the Puranas.”


   TEXT 15.5
   kim   ca   vedartha-dipakanam   sastranam   madhya-patitabhyupagame   ’py
avirbhavaka-vaisistyat tayor eva vaisistyam. yatha padme
   dvaipayanena yad buddham brahmadyais tan na budhyate
   sarva-buddham sa vai veda tad-buddham nanya-gocaram
   Moreover, even if we count the  Itihasas  and  Puranas  among  the  books
explaining the meaning of the Vedas, still they  are  unique  because  their
compiler is so glorious. The Padma Purana says, “Brahma and  others  do  not
know what Bhagavan Veda-vyasa knows. Indeed, He knows  everything  known  to
others, but what He knows is beyond everyone else’s grasp.”


   COMMENTARY
   The Itihasas, Puranas, and Vedas All Have the Same Origin
   The word sanksiptam  in  the  verse  cited  here  from  the  Siva  Purana
(7.1.1.37) is significant. It means “condensed,” not “composed.” Srila Veda-
vyasa, the literary incarnation  of  God,  condensed  the  already  existing
Vedas. Then He took unused verses from that abridged portion and  made  them
into the Puranas. Thus  He  did  not  create  the  Puranas  as  an  original
composition.  This  confirms  that  the  Puranas,   by   virtue   of   their
transcendental origin, are equal to the four Vedas.  They  are  eternal  and
apauruseya.
   One may protest that since the Puranas have names such as Skanda and Agni
they must have been composed by these  persons,  and  so  they  are  neither
eternal nor apauruseya. But if this were  the  case,  the  Vedas  themselves
would have to be considered noneternal compositions since their  parts  have
names like Katha Upanisad and Aitareya Brahmana, which refer  to  the  sages
Katha and Aitareya. The explanation is that portions of the Vedas are  named
after certain sages not because they wrote those portions but  because  they
were these portions’ main teachers and exponents. Since persons  with  names
like Katha and Aitareya appear in every millennium,  one  should  not  think
that before the appearance of the known Katha and Aitareya these names  were
meaningless words in the Vedas.
   In the same way, several of the Puranas  are  named  either  after  their
first teacher or the person who rearranged them. It may  sometimes  be  that
over the course of time a certain Vedic work  becomes  less  popular  or  is
completely forgotten on this planet. Eventually some sage or  demigod  again
speaks it, and then the book becomes known by his name. An example  of  this
is given in  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  where  sage  Yajïavalkya  is  described  as
receiving the  Vajasaneyi-samhita  of  the  Yajur  Veda  from  the  sun-god:
“Satisfied by such glorification, the powerful sun-god assumed the  form  of
a horse (vaja) and presented  to  the  sage  Yajïavalkya  the  yajur-mantras
previously unknown in human society”  (Bhag.  12.6.73).  Just  as  the  Lord
seems to take birth and disappear like a mortal being, the Vedic  literature
similarly becomes manifest  and  unmanifest.  Srimad-Bhagavatam  had  become
unmanifest at the end of the Dvapara-yuga, five thousand years ago. At  that
time Narada Muni instructed Vyasa to again reveal  the  Bhagavatam.  If  the
Bhagavatam had not existed before, Puranas older than the  Bhagavatam  would
not refer to it  by  name.  In  the  Padma  Purana,  Uttara-khanda,  Gautama
advises Ambarisa Maharaja, who reigned in the Satya-yuga, to  study  Srimad-
Bhagavatam.
   Thus the Puranas  are  eternal,  but  sometimes  they  are  manifest  and
sometimes unmanifest in human society. As the Lord  is  independent  in  His
appearance and disappearance, so by His free will  He  speaks  the  revealed
scriptures through the medium of various sages and  gives  these  scriptures
various names.
   Another objection to the Itihasas’  and  Puranas’  Vedic  status  may  be
stated as follows: In Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.4.25) Suta  Gosvami  says,  stri-
sudra-dvija-bandhunam  trayi  na  sruti-gocara<193>iti   bharatam   akhyanam
krpaya munina krtam: “Women, laborers, and unqualified  descendants  of  the
twice-born have no access  to  the  Vedas.<193>Therefore  the  sage  [Vyasa]
mercifully compiled the Mahabharata.” Since the  Mahabharata,  the  foremost
of the Itihasas, was written specifically  for  women  and  others  with  no
access to the Vedas, how can the Itihasas be part of  the  Vedas?  Moreover,
in
   TEXT 13 of the same chapter, Saunaka Rsi says to Suta Gosvami, manye tvam
visaye vacam snatam anyatra  chandasat:  “We  consider  you  expert  in  all
subjects except the Vedas.” So if Suta Gosvami was not expert in  the  Vedas
yet was being requested to narrate the Puranas (specifically  the  Bhagavata
Purana), how can the Puranas be part of the Vedas?
   Anticipating these objections, Srila Jiva Gosvami compares the  privilege
of studying the Itihasas and Puranas to that of chanting Krsna’s holy  name,
the choicest fruit of the Vedas. The holy name of  Krsna  is  purely  Vedic,
yet anyone may chant it, including those who have  no  right  to  study  the
Vedas. Similarly, the Itihasas and Puranas are also purely Vedic,  yet  even
a sincere sudra or outcaste can approach them, just as he or she  may  chant
the holy name of the Lord.
   As one can gain all perfection simply by chanting Lord Krsna’s holy name,
which is the ultimate fruit of the Vedas, so one can learn  the  essence  of
the Vedas by studying the Itihasas and Puranas, even  without  studying  the
Vedas themselves. If one could not do so, then knowledge of  how  to  attain
perfection would be inaccessible to those who are barred from  studying  the
Vedas because they are not twice-born.
   Finally, even if one were to include the Itihasas and Puranas among other
smrti scriptures written by saintly sages to  explain  the  meaning  of  the
Vedas, the Itihasas and  Puranas  occupy  a  unique  place  because  of  the
eminence of  their  propounder,  Srila  Vyasadeva,  an  incarnation  of  the
Supreme Lord.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami elaborates on how the Itihasas  and  Puranas  are
superexcellent by virtue of their compiler’s divinity.


===== TS.16 =====
NUMBER: 16
SOURCE LABEL: Text 16

skande
   vyasa-citta-sthitakasad avacchinnani kanicit
   anye vyavaharanty etany uri-krtya grhad iva
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   tathaiva drstam Sri-visnu-purane parasara-vakyam
   tato ’tra mat-suto vyasa astavimsatime ’ntare
   vedam ekam catus-padam caturdha vyabhajat prabhuh


   yathatra tena vai vyasta veda-vyasena dhi-mata
   vedas tatha samastais tair vyasair anyais tatha maya


   tad anenaiva vyasanam sakha-bhedan dvijottama
   catur-yugesu racitan samastesv avadharaya


   krsna-dvaipayanam vyasam viddhi narayanam prabhum
   ko ’nyo hi bhuvi maitreya mahabharata-krd bhavet
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   The Skanda Purana states, “Just as a person picks up things  in  his  own
house and uses them, many people  have  taken  knowledge  from  the  sky  of
Vyasa’s heart for their own use.”
   We also find this a  statement  by  Parasara  Rsi  in  the  Visnu  Purana
[3.4.2–5]: “Thereafter, during the twenty-eighth manv-antara,  the  Lord  in
the form of my son Vyasa took the one Veda,  consisting  of  four  sections,
and divided it into four separate parts.  Just  as  this  intelligent  Vyasa
divided the Veda,  previously  all  other  Vyasas,  including  myself,  also
divided it. O best of the twice-born, understand  that  in  every  cycle  of
four yugas Vyasas come and arrange  the  Veda  into  various  branches.  But
know, O Maitreya, that Sri Krsna-dvaipayana Vyasa is Lord Narayana  Himself.
Who else in this world could have written the great epic Mahabharata?”


   TEXT 16.2
   skanda eva
   narayanad vinispannam jïanam krta-yuge sthitam
   kiïcit tad anyatha jatam tretayam dvapare ’khilam


   gautamasya rseh sapaj jïane tv ajïanatam gate
   sankirna-buddhayo deva brahma-rudra-purahsarah


   saranyam saranam jagmur narayanam anamayam
   tair vijïapita-karyas tu bhagavan purusottamah


   avatirno maha-yogi satyavatyam parasarat
   utsannan bhagavan vedan ujjahara harih svayam
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   The Skanda Purana further  states,  “In  Satya-yuga  the  knowledge  that
emanated from Lord Narayana remained pure. It became  somewhat  polluted  in
Treta-yuga, and completely so in Dvapara-yuga. When  ignorance  had  covered
that  knowledge  because  of  Gautama  Rsi’s  curse,  the  demigods   became
perplexed. Led by Brahma and  Rudra,  they  approached  Lord  Narayana,  the
Supreme Person and faultless protector, and told Him why they had  come.  On
the request of the demigods, Lord Hari then  descended  as  the  great  yogi
Vyasa, son of Satyavati  and  Parasara,  and  re-established  the  forgotten
Vedas.”


   TEXT 16.3
   veda-sabdenatra puranadi-dvayam api  grhyate.  tad  evam  itihasa-purana-
vicara eva sreyan iti siddham. tatrapi puranasyaiva  garima  drsyate.  uktam
hi naradiye
   vedarthad adhikam manye puranartham varanane
   vedah pratisthitah sarve purane natra samsayah


   puranam anyatha krtva tiryag-yonim avapnuyat
   su-danto ’pi su-santo ’pi na gatim kvacid apnuyat
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   Here the word veda also indicates the Itihasas and Puranas.  Thus  it  is
established that studying the Itihasas and Puranas is supremely  beneficial.
And of these two, the Puranas are more excellent. As stated in the  Naradiya
Purana, “O lovely one, I consider the Puranas more important than the  Vedas
because the Puranas firmly establish all the Vedic  meanings.  There  is  no
doubt of this. One  who  disrespects  the  Puranas  will  take  birth  as  a
subhuman; even if he can expertly  control  his  senses  and  mind,  he  can
attain no good destination.”


   COMMENTARY
   The Compiler of the Itihasas and Puranas is Unique
   To a large extent one can know the quality of a product by assessing  the
quality of the person who  made  it.  By  this  criterion  the  Puranas  and
Itihasas are supremely excellent, since they were compiled by Lord  Narayana
Himself in the form of Srila Vyasadeva.
   Here Srila Vyasa’s mind is compared to the unlimited sky, indicating that
just as the sky accommodates all  objects,  so  Vyasa’s  mind  contains  all
knowledge. Another significance of comparing Vyasa’s  mind  to  the  sky  is
that the sky is the medium for sound, which transmits  knowledge.  In  other
words, Vyasa’s mind is the medium for transcendental  sound,  which  is  the
basis of all kinds of knowledge. All other thinkers,  both  on  this  planet
and on higher planets, simply make use of  the  knowledge  Srila  Vyasa  has
given. According to one Sanskrit saying, vyasocchistam  jagat  sarvam:  “The
whole world tastes the remnants of Vyasa’s knowledge.” Any  “new”  idea  one
may find or conceive of already  exists  in  Hhis  writings.  Thus  all  the
writers throughout history have borrowed from Him, directly or indirectly.
   According to Parasara Muni, at the beginning of  each  Kali-yuga  in  the
repeated cycle of four yugas, a vyasa, or “compiler,”  arranges  the  Vedas.
In the present reign of Manu, Parasara himself was the  twenty-sixth  Vyasa,
and Sri Krsna-dvaipayana is the twenty-eighth. Of  the  twenty-eight  Vyasas
who have appeared until now, Krsna-dvaipayana is special because  He  is  an
incarnation of Lord Narayana. He appeared on the request of the demigods  at
the end of the Dvapara-yuga, after a curse spoken  by  Gautama  Muni  caused
ignorance to cover the Vedic knowledge.
   Chapter 171 of the Varaha  Purana  relates  how  Gautama  Muni  underwent
severe austerities during a  famine  to  please  Lord  Brahma.  When  Brahma
offered Gautama a boon, the sage asked that he would be  able  to  feed  all
his guests. The boon was  granted,  and  benevolent  Gautama  fed  his  many
brahmana guests for the duration of the famine.  When  rains  finally  came,
the brahmanas wanted to leave his hermitage.  As  is  the  custom,  however,
Gautama asked them to stay a little longer,  and  they  agreed.  After  some
time they again wished to leave, but once again Gautama  prevailed  on  them
to stay a while longer. This happened a few times.
   Finally the brahmanas, determined to leave, devised a plan. They made  an
illusory cow and left it near Gautama’s asrama. In the early  morning,  when
the sage was going to bathe, the animal blocked his path, and to  drive  her
away he threw a few drops of water at her. At the first touch of the  water,
the cow fell down dead. The brahmanas immediately  raised  a  hue  and  cry,
declaring “We cannot stay here and accept food from a cow-killer!” and  then
they left for  their  respective  residences.  Later  Gautama  performed  an
atonement, and by his mystic power he could  understand  that  he  had  been
tricked. So he angrily cursed the brahmanas that they would lose  all  their
Vedic  knowledge.  In  this  way  the  Vedic  knowledge  became  covered  by
ignorance during the Dvapara-yuga, and thus it was necessary  for  Vyasa  to
send forth the Vedas again.
   From Lord Siva’s statement that the Puranas are more important  than  the
Vedas because they explain them, we should not conclude that  absolutely  no
one should study the Vedas. Still, Vyasadeva’s verdict is that in  Kali-yuga
people are not intelligent enough to understand  the  true  message  of  the
Vedas, especially since  there  exists  no  authentic  disciplic  succession
through which to acquire this understanding. We find, in  fact,  that  those
who attempt nowadays to study only the Vedas  and  Upanisads  often  end  up
taking to ordinary,  fruitive  activities  or  else  to  meditation  on  the
impersonal Brahman, with the aim of merging into it. They  do  not  come  to
the Vaisnava siddhanta,  the  perfect  conclusion  of  Vedic  understanding,
which  is  realization  of  unalloyed  devotional  service  to  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead. The failure of modern-day students of the  Vedas  to
understand their real message is proof that this  message  is  not  easy  to
discern in  the  present  age.  As  Lord  Krsna  says  in  Srimad-Bhagavatam
(11.3.44), paroksa-vado vedo ’yam: “The Vedas speak indirectly.”  Therefore,
if we wish to learn the true conclusion of the Vedas  in  this  age,  it  is
more practical to study the Puranas.
   However, a serious student who wants to understand the Puranas’ siddhanta
must still seek out a guru in disciplic succession. This basic  prerequisite
of Vedic study is not  waived  when  one  approaches  the  Puranas.  Indeed,
Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.3.21) emphatically declares, tasmad  gurum  prapadyeta
jijïasuh sreya uttamam: “One who seriously wants to learn about the  highest
good in life must take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master.”
   Next, Srila Jiva Gosvami explains the three divisions of the Puranas.


===== TS.17 =====
NUMBER: 17
SOURCE LABEL: Text 17

skande prabhasa-khande ca
   veda-van niscalam manye puranartham dvijottamah
   vedah pratisthitah sarve purane natra samsayah


   bibhety alpa-srutad vedo mam ayam calayisyati
   itihasa-puranais tu niscalo ’yam krtah pura


   yan na drstam hi vedesu tad drstam smrtisu dvijah
   ubhayor yan na drstam hi tat puranaih pragiyate


   yo veda caturo vedan sangopanisado dvijah
   puranam naiva janati na ca sa syad vicaksanah
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   Furthermore,  the  Prabhasa-khanda  of  the  Skanda  Purana  [5.3.121–24]
states:
   “O best of the twice-born, I consider the meaning of the Puranas to be as
well established as that of the Vedas.  Without  doubt  all  the  Vedas  are
given a firm foundation in them. Once, long ago, the Vedas became afraid  of
those who might hear from her insufficiently, and she  thought,  ‘This  sort
of person will distort my  meaning.’  But  then  the  Itihasas  and  Puranas
helped the Vedas by firmly establishing her meaning. What  cannot  be  found
in the Vedas is found in the smrti, and what cannot be found  in  either  is
clearly explained in the Puranas. A person is not considered learned  if  he
does not know the Puranas, O learned brahmanas, even if he has  studied  the
four Vedas along with the Vedangas and Upanisads.”


   TEXT 17.2
   atha purananam evam pramanye sthite  ’pi  tesam  api  samastyenapracarad-
rupatvan  nana-devata-pratipadaka-prayatvad   arvacinaih   ksudra-buddhibhir
artho duradhigama iti tad-avastha eva samsayah.
   Next we must consider the following doubt concerning the  status  of  the
Puranas:  Although  their  authority  has  been  thus  established  [in  the
previous Texts], still it is difficult for the less intelligent men  of  the
modern age to comprehend  their  ultimate  meaning.  The  reasons  for  this
difficulty are  that  the  Puranas,  like  the  Vedas,  are  only  partially
available and that in general the Puranas try to establish the supremacy  of
various deities.


   TEXT 17.3
   yad uktam matsye
   païcangam ca puranam syad akhyanam itarat smrtam
   sattvikesu ca kalpesu mahatmyam adhikam hareh


   rajasesu ca mahatmyam adhikam brahmano viduh
   tadvad agnes ca mahatmyam tamasesu sivasya ca
   sankirnesu sarasvatyah pitènam ca nigadyate
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   As stated in the Matsya Purana [53.65, 68–69]:
   “A  history  is  called  a  Purana  if   it   has   the   five   defining
characteristics; otherwise it is called  an  akhyana.  The  sattvic  Puranas
primarily glorify Lord Hari; the  rajasic  Puranas,  Lord  Brahma;  and  the
tamasic Puranas, Lord Siva and Durga, along with Agni. The Puranas in  mixed
modes glorify Sarasvati and the Pitas.”


   TEXT 17.4
   atragnes tat-tad-agnau pratipadyasya tat-tad-yajïasyety  arthah.  sivasya
ceti  ca-karac  chivayas  ca.  sankirnesu  sattva-rajas-tamo-mayesu  kalpesu
bahusu.  sarasvatya  nana-vany-atmaka-tad-upalaksitaya   nana-devataya   ity
arthah. pitènam `karmana pitr-lokah'  iti  srutes  tat-prapaka-karmanam  ity
arthah.
   Here the word agni refers to the Vedic  sacrifices  performed  by  making
offerings into various sacred fires. The  word  ca  (“and”)  in  the  phrase
sivasya ca implies the wife of Lord Siva. Sankirnesu (“in the mixed”)  means
“in the various Puranas in the mixed  modes  of  sattva,  rajas,  and  tamas
combined.” Here sarasvatyah (“of Sarasvati”) means “of the  presiding  deity
of speech” and, by implication, “of the various deities referred to  in  the
numerous scriptural texts she embodies.” According to sruti,  karmana  pitr-
lokah:  “By  fruitive  activities  one  can  attain   the   abode   of   the
forefathers.” Thus here the word pitènam (“of the  forefathers”)  refers  to
the fruitive rituals meant for attaining to the planet of the forefathers.


   COMMENTARY
   Three Divisions of the Puranas
   The verse from the Matsya Purana cited in
   TEXT 17.3 mentions the five subjects that characterize a Purana.  Another
verse of the Matsya Purana (53.65) lists those subjects:
   sargas ca pratisargas ca vamso manvantarani ca
   vamsyanucaritam caiva puranam païca-laksanam
“The five subjects that characterize a  Purana  are  creation,  dissolution,
genealogy, reigns of Manus, and the activities of famous  kings.”  Texts  57
and 61 of Sri Tattva-sandarbha discuss these five subjects in detail.
   In the verses cited above from the Matsya Purana, the  word  kalpa  means
“scripture” or “Purana.” This is one of the various meanings of  this  word,
as listed in the Medini Sanskrit dictionary (1.21.2): kalpah  sastre  vidhau
nyaye samvarte brahmane dine. “Kalpa  means  `scripture,’  `rule,’  `logic,’
`dissolution,’ and `day of Brahma.’”
   The Puranas are divided according to the modes of  material  nature.  The
list of the Puranas belonging to each mode is given  in  the  Padma  Purana,
Uttara-khanda (236.18–21):
   vaisnavam naradiyam ca tatha bhagavatam subham
   garudam ca tatha padmam varaham subha-darsane


   sattvikani puranani vijïeyani subhani vai
   brahmandam brahma-vaivartam markandeyam tathaiva ca


   bhavisyam vamanam brahmam rajasani nibodha me
   matsyam kaurmam tatha laingam saivam skandam tathaiva ca


   agneyam ca sad etani tamasani nibodha me
“[Lord  Siva  said:]  `O  beautiful  lady,  know  that  the  Visnu,  Narada,
Bhagavata, Garuda, Padma, and Varaha Puranas are in the  mode  of  goodness,
the Brahmanda, Brahma-vaivarta, Markandeya,  Bhavisya,  Vamana,  and  Brahma
Puranas are in the mode of passion, and  the  Matsya,  Kurma,  Linga,  Siva,
Skanda, and Agni Puranas are in the mode of ignorance.’”
   The verses Srila Jiva cites from the Skanda Purana imply that the Puranas
are as good as the Vedas and should  be  accepted  as  such  by  anyone  who
accepts the Vedas’ authority. There are many commentaries on the Vedas,  but
the Puranas are the natural
   COMMENTARY  because they were compiled  by  the  Vedas’  compiler,  Srila
Vyasa. Therefore one can understand the message of  the  Vedas  by  studying
the Puranas alone, even without directly studying the Vedas.  But  study  of
the Vedas is incomplete in this age without study of the Puranas;  therefore
studying the Puranas is even more appropriate  and  practical  for  us  than
studying the Vedas.  Furthermore,  the  statement  from  the  Skanda  Purana
quoted in
   TEXT  17.1—that  no  one  can  become  learned   without   studying   the
Puranas—suggests  that  the  Puranas  are  also  more  important  than   the
Itihasas.
   But just as we meet with difficulties in studying the Vedas in this  age,
we also encounter difficulties in studying the Puranas. The  eighteen  major
Puranas and eighteen minor ones constitute a vast body  of  literature,  and
there are no current disciplic successions  or  authentic  commentaries  for
most of these works. Portions of some Puranas are not available,  and  other
Puranas have  variant  readings  and  interpolations.  As  with  the  Vedas,
independent study of the Puranas yields no clear  conclusion,  because  each
Purana seems to establish a different deity as the supreme. The Siva  Purana
proclaims Lord Siva supreme, the Visnu Purana, Lord Visnu, and  so  on.  The
result is confusion for one who studies them without proper  guidance.  Such
a student will not know whether to worship Siva, Visnu, Devi, or some  other
deity.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami gives the solution to this problem in the next Text.


===== TS.18 =====
NUMBER: 18
SOURCE LABEL: Text 18

TEXT 18.1
   tad evam sati tat-tat-kalpa-katha-mayatvenaiva  matsya  eva  prasiddhanam
tat-tat-purananam vyavastha jïapita. taratamyam  tu  katham  syad  yenetara-
nirnayah kriyeta. sattvadi-taratamyenaiveti cet `sattvat  saïjayate  jïanam'
iti `sattvam yad brahma-darsanam' iti ca nyayat  sattvikam  eva  puranadikam
paramartha-jïanaya prabalam ity ayatam.
   This being the case[—that Puranas are in  various  modes  of  nature—]the
Matsya Purana classifies them in three divisions based on the stories  found
in them. But how can we determine the relative importance of the Puranas  so
that we can then learn about the other subjects  under  discussion,  namely,
sambandha, abhidheya, and prayojana? If we use the three modes of nature  as
the basis for categorizing the Puranas,  depending  on  such  statements  as
“the mode of goodness produces knowledge”  [Bg.  14.17]  and  “the  mode  of
goodness leads to realization of the  Absolute  Truth”  [Bhag.  1.2.24],  we
will conclude that the Puranas and other such  literature  in  the  mode  of
goodness are superior means for gaining knowledge of the Absolute Truth.


   TEXT 18.2
   tathapi paramarthe ’pi nana-bhangya vipratipadyamananam  samadhanaya  kim
syat.  yadi  sarvasyapi  vedasya  puranasya  cartha-nirnayaya  tenaiva  Sri-
bhagavata vyasena brahma-sutram krtam tad-avalokenaiva sarvo  ’rtho  nirneya
ity ucyate  tarhi  nanya-sutra-kara-muny-anugatair  manyeta.  kim  catyanta-
gudharthanam alpaksaranam tat-sutranam anyarthatvam  kascid  acaksita  tatah
katarad ivatra samadhanam.
   But even then, how can we  reconcile  the  different  inconclusive  views
regarding the Absolute Truth that the various Puranas put  forward?  Someone
may propose study of  the  Vedanta-sutra  as  the  solution,  claiming  that
Bhagavan Vyasadeva  compiled  the  Vedanta-sutra  to  present  the  decisive
conclusion of both the Vedas and the Puranas concerning the Absolute  Truth.
But then the followers of sages who wrote other sutras may be  dissatisfied.
Moreover, since the  aphorisms  of  the  Vedanta  are  terse  and  extremely
esoteric, and since  they  are  also  subject  to  varying  interpretations,
someone will always express a  contrary  idea  about  their  meaning.  What,
then, can resolve disputes concerning the Vedanta-sutra?


   TEXT 18.3
   tad evam samadheyam yady ekatamam eva purana-laksanam apauruseyam sastram
sarva-vedetihasa-purananam artha-saram brahma-sutropajivyam ca bhavad  bhuvi
sampurnam pracarad-rupam syat. satyam uktam. yata  eva  ca  sarva-pramananam
cakravarti-bhutam asmad-abhimatam Srimad-bhagavatam evodbhavitam bhavata.
   This problem could be solved if there were one  scripture  that  had  the
characteristics of a Purana, that had no human origin,  that  presented  the
essence of all the Vedas, Itihasas, and  Puranas,  that  was  based  on  the
Vedanta-sutra, and that was available throughout the land  in  its  complete
form.
   Well said, sir, because you have reminded us about  our  revered  Srimad-
Bhagavatam, the emperor of all pramanas.


   COMMENTARY
   Srimad-Bhagavatam Is the Best of All Puranas
   The Matsya Purana, Chapter 53, gives the number of verses in each  Purana
and describes the benefits of donating each one on  special  days.  In  that
same chapter Suta Gosvami speaks two and a half verses containing a  formula
for dividing the Puranas into three classes according to which  one  of  the
three modes of nature predominates. These three classes  of  Purana  glorify
various deities, and commentators often try to establish their own  favorite
among  these  deities  as  supreme,  arguing  on  the  basis  of  logic  and
apparently  conclusive  scriptural  references.  One  consequence  of   this
partiality is that commentators tend to  denigrate  Puranas  in  a  category
different from their own: proponents of tamasic Puranas tend to  reject  the
authority of the rajasic and sattvic Puranas, and proponents of rajasic  and
sattvic Puranas likewise reject the Puranas outside their group.  But  there
cannot actually be several Absolute Truths; therefore the question of  which
Puranic deity is the one Supreme Truth remains to be settled.
   For the unbiased seeker of the truth, Srila Jiva  Gosvami  shows  how  to
resolve the matter. He explains that sattva, or the  mode  of  goodness,  is
clearly superior to passion and ignorance, as Lord  Krsna  confirms  in  the
Bhagavad-gita (14.17):
   sattvat saïjayate jïanam rajaso lobha eva ca
   pramada-mohau tamaso bhavato ’jïanam eva ca
“From the mode of goodness,  real  knowledge  develops;  from  the  mode  of
passion,  greed  develops;  and  from  the   mode   of   ignorance   develop
foolishness,  madness,  and  illusion.”  Srimad-Bhagavatam   (1.2.24)   also
states, tamasas tu rajas tasmat sattvam  yad  brahma-darsanam:  “Passion  is
better than  ignorance,  but  goodness  is  best  because  it  can  lead  to
realization of  the  Absolute  Truth.”  In  the  passage  where  this  verse
appears, Suta Gosvami is explaining  which  form  of  worship  produces  the
ultimate good. His opinion is that one can achieve the  ultimate  good  only
by  worshiping  Lord  Krsna,  the  personification  of  pure  goodness.  The
citation from the Matsya Purana in the previous
TEXT states that the sattvic Puranas glorify Lord Hari, Krsna. By  contrast,
the rajasic and tamasic Puranas recommend worship  of  other  deities.  Such
worship is in the lower modes of nature and does not lead to realization  of
the Absolute Truth.
   Thus one can tell the modal quality of a Purana by seeing which deity  it
recommends for worship. Another way to tell is by seeing how it opens. In  a
sattvic Purana the questioner will approach a learned  speaker  and  inquire
from him about the Absolute Truth. In this vein the questioner may  ask  the
speaker to  elaborate  on  the  nature  of  ultimate  reality,  the  supreme
religion for all, the ultimate benefit a human being  can  aspire  for,  how
one should prepare for death, and so on. These questions allow the  Purana’s
speaker full freedom to explain these topics; as  a  self-realized  teacher,
free from all gross and subtle material desires and concerned only with  the
welfare of the inquirer and those who will hear the discourse,  either  then
or in the future, the speaker replies with answers  that  are  specific  and
unambiguous, leaving no room for misinterpretation  or  confusion.  Examples
of such sattvic Puranas include the Padma Purana,  the  Visnu  Purana,  and,
most prominently, the Bhagavata Purana, or Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   In the rajasic and tamasic  Puranas,  however,  the  questioners  inquire
about limited topics, those that do not address  the  ultimate  concerns  of
life. In the Linga Purana, for example, the sages at Naimisaranya  ask  Suta
Gosvami to narrate the glory of Linga, Lord Siva. Although Suta Gosvami  has
fully realized the Absolute Truth and is perfectly competent to explain  it,
the questions here restrict him to  speaking  on  the  particular  topic  of
Linga. He is not free to explain the  deeper  meaning  of  life.  Since  all
rajasic and tamasic Puranas have this shortcoming, they cannot  be  reliable
sources of knowledge about the essential  topics  of  sambandha,  abhidheya,
and prayojana.
   The Puranas were arranged in different modes in response to  the  various
desires and interests of the conditioned souls. Nevertheless,  every  Purana
contains glorification of Lord Hari, the Absolute  Truth.  Srila  Veda-vyasa
included this glorification so that  even  persons  in  the  lower  material
modes can gradually develop interest in the Supreme Personality  of  Godhead
by hearing or reading the tamasic and rajasic Puranas.
   Someone might object  that  the  statement  cited  above  concerning  the
classification of the Puranas according to the modes does  not  itself  come
from a sattvic Purana and so should not be taken as authoritative. We  reply
that this classification is supported by numerous other statements as  well,
including some from such sattvic scriptures as the Padma  Purana,  which  we
have already cited in the previous Text. Nor is it true that the Puranas  in
the lower modes give no valid knowledge at all, since even  they  give  some
insight into absolute reality, what to speak of the insights they give  into
lesser  topics.  In  addition,  no  statement  in   the   Vedic   literature
specifically contradicts the  verses  cited  here  classifying  the  Puranas
according to the modes of nature, and so we  are  left  with  no  compelling
reason to doubt the authenticity of this classification.
   From this analysis we can conclude that in our  quest  for  the  ultimate
sabda-pramana we need consider  only  the  sattvic  Puranas.  As  the  Padma
Purana states, sattvika moksa-dah proktah:  “The  Puranas  in  the  mode  of
goodness lead to liberation.”
   But even these sattvic Puranas have been understood in many ways by great
thinkers. Some interpreters have found that they glorify the  path  of  yoga
as the best, others  have  concluded  that  they  recommend  bhakti  as  the
highest path, and yet others have found that they promote the path of  jïana
(knowledge) as supreme.
   Next Srila Jiva Gosvami suggests the Vedanta-sutra as a possible basis of
reconciliation.  The  Vedanta-sutra,   written   by   Vyasadeva,   certainly
incorporates the essential understanding of the Vedas and the  Puranas.  But
we must also consider that the dedicated followers of other sages who  wrote
philosophical sutras, such as Gautama and Pataïjali, might  not  accept  the
Vedanta-sutra’s ideas. Even if these followers of other  philosophers  could
somehow be convinced to change their minds by logical proof of  the  greater
authority of the Vedanta-sutra, the  situation  is  still  problematic:  The
sutras  of  the  Vedanta  being  terse  and  esoteric,  acaryas  of  various
persuasions have commented on them, and so it is difficult to  decide  whose
opinion agrees with that of Srila Veda-vyasa, the author.
   For the seeker who has come this far along  the  way  but  finds  himself
sinking in the marshy confusion created by the various scriptures and  their
myriad commentators, Srila Jiva Gosvami finally points out the  high  ground
of the Srimad-Bhagavatam. The Bhagavatam has the ten  characteristics  of  a
major Purana (discussed in
   TEXT 56); it is apauruseya; it is the natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra and thus constitutes the purport of  all
the Vedas, Itihasas, and Puranas; it is available in  its  entirety;  it  is
respected by all Vaisnava acaryas, and also many  others;  it  is  the  most
popular  of  the  Puranas;  it  has  an   intact   tradition   of   Vaisnava
commentaries; and it is  the  culmination  of  Srila  Veda-vyasa’s  literary
output, composed in His maturity.
   By establishing Srimad-Bhagavatam as the last word  in  Vedic  scripture,
Srila Jiva Gosvami fulfills the will of Lord Sri  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu,  who
accepted  the  Bhagavatam  as   “the   spotless   Purana,”   the   supremely
authoritative text.
   In the next
   TEXT Jiva Gosvami explains that Srimad-Bhagavatam has not  been  composed
by a mortal and that it is the natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra.


===== TS.19 =====
NUMBER: 19
SOURCE LABEL: Text 19

TEXT 19.1
   yat  khalu  sarva-purana-jatam  avirbhavya  brahma-sutram  ca   praniyapy
aparitustena tena bhagavata  nija-sutranam  akrtrima-bhasya-bhutam  samadhi-
labdham  avirbhavitam  yasminn  eva  sarva-sastra-samanvayo  drsyate  sarva-
vedartha-sutra-laksanam gayatrim adhikrtya pravartitatvat.
   Indeed, Lord Vyasa was not satisfied even after compiling all the Puranas
and the Vedanta-sutra.  He  therefore  wrote  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  which  was
revealed to Him in trance, as the natural
   COMMENTARY   on  His  own  sutras.  In  Srimad-Bhagavatam  we  find   the
consistent reconciliation of all scriptures. That the Bhagavatam  gives  the
essence of all scriptures is shown by its opening with the  Gayatri  mantra,
the essential
   TEXT incorporating the message of all the Vedas.


   TEXT 19.2
   tathapi tat-svarupam matsye
   yatradhikrtya gayatrim varnyate dharma-vistarah
   vrtrasura-vadhopetam tad bhagavatam isyate


   likhitva tac ca yo dadyad dhema-simha-samanvitam
   prausthapadyam paurnamasyam sa yati paramam gatim
   astadasa-sahasrani puranam tat prakirtitam
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   The characteristics of Srimad-Bhagavatam are  further  described  in  the
Matsya Purana [53.20–22]: “That Purana is known as  Srimad-Bhagavatam  which
explains the topmost principles of religion with reference  to  the  Gayatri
mantra and which tells of the killing of the demon Vrtra.  This  Purana  has
eighteen thousand verses. Whoever writes out a  copy  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam,
places it on a golden lion-throne, and presents it to someone on  the  full-
moon day of the month of Bhadra (August-September) will attain  the  supreme
goal.”


   TEXT 19.3
   atra  gayatri-sabdena  tat-sucaka-tad-avyabhicari-dhimahi-pada-samvalita-
tad-artha   evesyate   sarvesam   mantranam   adi-rupayas   tasyah    saksat
kathananarhatvat. tad-arthata ca `janmady asya  yatah'  `tene  brahma  hrda'
iti sarva-lokasrayatva-buddhi-vrtti-prerakatvadi-samyat. dharma-vistara  ity
atra  dharma-sabdah  parama-dharma-parah  `dharmah  projjhita-kaitavo   ’tra
paramah' ity atraiva pratipaditatvat. sa ca bhagavad-dhyanadi-laksana  eveti
purastad vyakti-bhavisyati.
   Here the word gayatri indicates the meaning of the Gayatri mantra,  which
includes the word dhimahi. Dhimahi is an indicator of Gayatri, implying  its
purport; it would be improper to directly utter Gayatri itself,  the  origin
of all Vedic mantras. The first verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam  [1.1.1]  alludes
to the meaning of Gayatri by the phrases janmady asya yatah  (“by  Him  this
universe is created, maintained, and destroyed”) and tene brahma  hrda  (“He
revealed Vedic knowledge in the heart”).  These  phrases  express  the  same
meaning as Gayatri, describing the Lord as the basis of  all  the  universes
and as He who inspires everyone’s intellect.
   The word dharma in the compound  dharma-vistara  refers  to  the  supreme
religion, as expressed in the Bhagavatam’s words  dharmah  projjhita-kaitavo
’tra paramah [Bhag. 1.1.2]: “the supreme religion, devoid  of  all  cheating
propensities.” And, as will become clear in upcoming Texts, this  dharma  is
indeed characterized by meditation on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


   COMMENTARY
   Srimad-Bhagavatam Is the Natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra
   Srimad-Bhagavatam contains  the  story  of  its  own  appearance  as  the
crowning achievement of Srila  Vyasadeva’s  literary  efforts.  First  Srila
Vyasadeva arranged the four Vedas, and  then  He  composed  the  great  epic
Mahabharata for the benefit of women, sudras, and others  who  cannot  study
the Vedas. Next He compiled the Puranas, the natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedas, and then He provided the essence of  the  Vedas
and Puranas in His Vedanta-sutra. But even after all this  literary  output,
Veda-vyasa felt discontented,  although  He  did  not  know  why.  Then  His
spiritual master, Narada Muni, came to His rescue:
   jijïasitam su-sampannam api te mahad adbhutam
   krtavan bharatam yas tvam sarvartha-paribrmhitam
“Your inquiries were full and your studies were  also  well  fulfilled,  and
there is no doubt that you have prepared a great  and  wonderful  work,  the
Mahabharata, which is full of  all  kinds  of  Vedic  sequences  elaborately
explained” (Bhag. 1.5.3).
   yatha dharmadayas cartha muni-varyanukirtitah
   na tatha vasudevasya mahima hy anuvarnitah
“Although, great sage, you have very broadly described the  four  principles
beginning with  religious  performances,  you  have  not  in  the  same  way
described the glories of the Supreme Personality, Vasudeva” (Bhag. 1.5.9).
   Following Narada Muni’s instruction, Srila Vyasa meditated, and while  He
was in trance Srimad-Bhagavatam was revealed to Him. Thus it is  clear  that
Srimad-Bhagavatam, which gave solace to Vyasadeva,  is  knowledge  descended
from the transcendental realm. In upcoming Texts Sri Jiva will show that  it
is also the natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra.
   Various Puranas mention the relationship  between  Srimad-Bhagavatam  and
the Gayatri  mantra.  Considered  the  essence  of  the  Vedas,  Gayatri  is
supposed to be recited at dawn, noon, and dusk by  every  twice-born  person
(brahmana, ksatriya,  and  vaisya).  According  to  Sridhara  Svami  in  his
Bhavartha-dipika,  Srimad-Bhagavatam  begins  with   the   Gayatri   mantra.
Commenting on the first  verse  of  the  Bhagavatam,  he  writes,  dhimahiti
gayatrya prarambhena ca gayatry-akhya-brahma-vidya-rupam  etat  puranam  iti
darsitam: “That the Gayatri phrase indicated  by  the  word  dhimahi  begins
this Purana shows that this work has the nature of the  brahma-vidya  [Vedic
knowledge of the Supreme]  called  Gayatri.”  Because  Srimad-Bhagavatam  is
based  on  Gayatri,  the  cream  of  the  Vedas,  it  explains  the  topmost
principles of religion.  The  Bhagavatam  (1.1.3)  thus  calls  itself  “the
ripened fruit of the wish-fulfilling tree of the Vedas”  (nigama-kalpa-taror
galitam phalam).
   The recitation of Gayatri and other Vedic mantras is governed  by  strict
rules regarding the person, time, and place, and  also  the  purity  of  the
chanter, but such restrictions do  not  apply  to  Srimad-Bhagavatam.  Since
anyone may read the Bhagavatam, strictly speaking it would be  improper  for
the Gayatri mantra to appear there in its original form.  Gayatri  is  among
the Vedic mantras, which only the twice-born are allowed to chant.  That  is
why  Srila  Vyasadeva  expressed  the  form  and  idea  of  Gayatri  in  the
Bhagavatam without using the actual mantra.  Only  one  word  from  Gayatri,
dhimahi,  has  been  kept  to  indicate  his  intention,  because  it  is  a
compulsory word in the mantra and carries its essence.
   Another reason Vyasa did  not  write  the  original  Gayatri  in  Srimad-
Bhagavatam is that doing so would have  invited  misinterpretation.  Various
schools of thought have explained Gayatri  differently—as  a  meditation  on
impersonal Brahman, on the sun, on  the  fire-god,  on  Lord  Siva,  and  so
forth. Only rarely is it understood  to  be  a  meditation  on  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  Vasudeva.   But   in   Srimad-Bhagavatam,   Srila
Vyasadeva’s own
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra, Vyasadeva  delivers  the  complete  and
unambiguous meaning of  Gayatri  in  the  opening  verse.  He  reveals  that
Gayatri is a meditation on  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  His
eternal consort, Sri Radhika. This meditation is indeed the highest  dharma.
In the 105th
   TEXT of Sri Paramatma-sandarbha, Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  will  explain  the
Gayatri mantra in detail, and in  the  Krsna-sandarbha  he  will  thoroughly
analyze the Bhagavatam’s first verse and show it to be a meditation  on  Sri
Sri Radha-Krsna.
   In the next
   TEXT of the Tattva-sandarbha, Srila Jiva Gosvami further  introduces  the
Srimad-Bhagavatam, describing its  distinguishing  features  and  supporting
his statements with scriptural references.


                              TATTVA SANDARBHA


                            BY SRILA JIVA GOSWAMI


                                   [PART4]


===== TS.20 =====
NUMBER: 20
SOURCE LABEL: Text 20

TEXT 20.1
   evam skande prabhasa-khande ca `yatradhikrtya gayatrim' ity-adi
   sarasvatasya kalpasya madhye ye syur naramarah
   tad-vrttantodbhavam loke tac ca bhagavatam smrtam


   likhitva tac ca
   @VCONTINUE = ity-adi ca.
   @V1 - astadasa-sahasrani puranam tat prakirtitam
   @VCONTINUE = iti. tad evam agni-purane ca vacanani vartante.
   In the Skanda Purana, Prabhasa-khanda [7.1.2.39–42] we find a description
of Srimad-Bhagavatam similar to the one in the Matsya Purana:
   “The Purana known as Srimad-Bhagavatam recounts the deeds of  humans  and
demigods in the Sarasvata-kalpa, explains the supreme religion in  terms  of
Gayatri, and narrates the slaying of Vrtrasura.  It  has  eighteen  thousand
verses.<193>Whoever writes out a copy of the  Bhagavatam,  places  it  on  a
golden lion-throne, and presents it to someone on the full-moon day  of  the
month of Bhadra will attain the supreme destination.”
   These verses are also found in the Agni Purana [272.6–7].


   TEXT 20.2
   tika-krdbhih pramani-krte puranantare ca
   grantho ’stadasa-sahasro dvadasa-skandha-sammitah
   hayagriva-brahma-vidya yatra vrtra-vadhas tatha
   gayatrya ca samarambhas tad vai bhagavatam viduh
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   Yet another Purana, cited by the Bhagavatam commentator  Sridhara  Svami,
describes the characteristics of Srimad-Bhagavatam thus:
   “The Purana known  as  Srimad-Bhagavatam  has  eighteen  thousand  verses
divided into twelve cantos, begins with Gayatri,  describes  the  Hayagriva-
brahma-vidya, and narrates the slaying of Vrtrasura.”


   TEXT 20.3
   atra  `hayagriva-brahma-vidya'  iti   vrtra-vadha-sahacaryena   narayana-
varmaivocyate. hayagriva-sabdenatrasva-sira dadhicir  evocyate.  tenaiva  ca
pravartita narayana-varmakhya  brahma-vidya.  tasyasva-sirastvam  ca  sasthe
`yad  va  asva-siro  nama'  ity  atra  prasiddham  narayana-varmano  brahma-
vidyatvam ca
   etac chrutva tathovaca dadhyann atharvanas tayoh
   pravargyam brahma-vidyam ca sat-krto ’satya-sankitah
   @VCONTINUE = iti svami-tikotthapita-vacanena ceti.
   The Hayagriva-brahma-vidya mentioned here (meaning “the doctrine  of  the
Supreme taught by Hayagriva”), is “The Armor of Narayana”  (Narayana-varma),
since it is narrated in the same con
   TEXT as the killing of Vrtra. The word haya-griva here refers to Dadhici,
the sage with a horse’s head. He taught  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  called
Narayana-varma.  His  accepting  a  horse’s  head  and  receiving  the  name
Asvasira (“horse-headed one”) are  mentioned  in  Srimad-Bhagavatam’s  Sixth
Canto [6.9.52],  where  these  words  are  spoken:  “he  who  has  the  name
Asvasira.” From a verse Sridhara Svami cites in his
   COMMENTARY  on this Bhagavatam
   TEXT we get further confirmation that the Narayana-varma  is  in  fact  a
standard teaching about the Absolute:
   “Upon hearing this and feeling honored, Dadhici, anxious not to break his
promise,  instructed  the  twin  Asvini-kumaras  in  the  knowledge  of  the
Pravargya sacrifice and Brahma-vidya.”


   TEXT 20.4
   Srimad-bhagavatasya bhagavat-priyatvena bhagavatabhistatvena  ca  parama-
sattvikatvam. yatha padme ambarisam prati gautama-prasnah
   puranam tvam bhagavatam pathase purato hareh
   caritram daitya-rajasya prahladasya ca bhu-pate
   @VCONTINUE = tatraiva vaïjuli-mahatmye tasya tasminn upadesah
   ratrau tu jagarah karyah srotavya vaisnavi katha
   gita nama-sahasram ca puranam suka-bhasitam
   @V1PLUS = pathitavyam prayatnena hareh santosa-karanam
   Since Srimad-Bhagavatam is pleasing  to  the  Supreme  Lord  and  is  His
devotees’ favorite book, it is the supremely sattvika scripture.  As  stated
in the Padma Purana, in Gautama Rsi’s question to Maharaja Ambarisa,
   “O lord of the earth, do you recite the Bhagavata Purana before the Deity
of Lord Hari, especially the history of the king  of  the  demons,  Prahlada
Maharaja?” (Padma Pur., Uttara-khanda 22.115).
   Again in the Padma Purana, Gautama further  instructs  Ambarisa,  in  the
section glorifying the vow of Vaïjuli Maha-dvadasi:
   “One should stay awake throughout that night  and  hear  scriptures  that
narrate stories of Lord Visnu and His  devotees,  especially  Bhagavad-gita,
the thousand names of Lord  Visnu,  and  the  Purana  narrated  by  Sukadeva
[Srimad-Bhagavatam]. One should recite  these  with  care,  since  they  are
pleasing to Lord Hari.”


   TEXT 20.5
   tatraivanyatra
   ambarisa suka-proktam nityam bhagavatam srnu
   pathasva sva-mukhenapi yadicchasi bhava-ksayam
   @VCONTINUE = skande prahlada-samhitayam dvaraka-mahatmye
   Sri-bhagavatam bhaktya pathate hari-sannidhau
   @V1PLUS = jagare tat-padam yati kula-vrnda-samanvitah
   And elsewhere in the Padma Purana we find this statement:
   “O Ambarisa, if you wish to end your material existence, then  every  day
you should hear the Bhagavatam  that  was  narrated  by  Sukadeva,  and  you
should also recite it yourself.”
   Finally, we find the following statement in the Prahlada-samhita  of  the
Skanda Purana, in the section describing Dvaraka’s glories:
   “A person who stays up [on the night  of  Ekadasi]  and  recites  Srimad-
Bhagavatam with devotion before the Deity of Lord Hari goes  to  the  Lord’s
abode along with all his family members.”


   COMMENTARY
   The Characteristics of Srimad-Bhagavatam
   In this
   TEXT Jiva Gosvami  gives  special  attention  to  establishing  that  the
Bhagavatam glorified in the  Puranas  is  Srimad-Bhagavatam.  He  does  this
because some scholars of his time held  that  the  Devi  Bhagavatam,  rather
than  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  was  actually  the  Bhagavatam  glorified  in  the
Puranas. Like Srimad-Bhagavatam,  the  Devi  Bhagavatam  is  a  Purana  with
twelve cantos, 18,000 verses, and an account of Vrtrasura’s death,  although
its account of how  Vrtra  was  killed  differs  from  the  one  in  Srimad-
Bhagavatam. Also, when some traditional scholars read in  the  Puranas  that
on the  full-moon  day  of  the  month  of  Bhadra  one  should  donate  the
Bhagavatam mounted on a golden lion (hema-simha), they  take  this  to  mean
the Devi Bhagavatam. This seems quite fitting, since Devi, or  Durga,  rides
on a lion. (In the case of Srimad-Bhagavatam, hema-simha  is  understood  to
mean “golden lion-throne.”)
   Srila Jiva Gosvami solves the controversy by citing references that  list
distinctive features  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam:  it  begins  with  the  Gayatri
mantra, it contains the  Hayagriva-brahma-vidya,  it  narrates  events  that
happened in the Sarasvata-kalpa, and it was first  spoken  by  Sri  Sukadeva
Gosvami to Pariksit Maharaja. Jiva Gosvami further supports his  opinion  by
quoting from the Bhavartha-dipika, Sridhara Svami’s
   COMMENTARY  on Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   The Devi Bhagavatam opens with a statement that appears to  be  based  on
Gayatri: om sarva-caitanya-rupam tam adyam vidyam  ca  dhimahi,  buddhim  ya
nah pracodayat. There are two reasons this statement should not  be  equated
with Gayatri: First,  nothing  in  it  corresponds  to  the  words  savituh,
varenyam, and bhargas  from  Gayatri.  (By  contrast,  in  Srimad-Bhagavatam
1.1.1 there  is  such  a  correspondence.).  Second,  this  statement  is  a
meditation on Devi, but as Sri Jiva will show in the next Text,  the  object
of meditation in Gayatri is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Visnu.
   Like Srimad-Bhagavatam, the  Devi  Bhagavatam  narrates  the  killing  of
Vrtrasura, but in its account Indra kills Vrtra with  ocean  foam  empowered
by Devi. Vrtrasura performed  severe  penances  for  hundreds  of  years  to
please Lord Brahma. When Brahma appeared before  him  and  offered  a  boon,
Vrtra asked that he would not be slain by any weapon made of iron  or  wood,
or one that was dry or wet. After  Lord  Brahma  granted  this  boon,  Vrtra
attacked Indra and defeated him. Indra  subsequently  took  help  from  Lord
Visnu, who entered Indra’s thunderbolt and also  advised  him  to  take  the
help of Devi and make a truce with Vrtra. Indra then  apparently  befriended
Vrtrasura. But one day at dusk Indra surprised  Vrtrasura  on  a  beach  and
slew him with his thunderbolt covered with foam, which was not a  weapon  of
iron or wood and was neither wet nor dry.
   The Devi Bhagavatam also makes no mention of  the  Hayagriva-brahma-vidya
(the Narayana-varma). For all these reasons it is clear that the  Bhagavatam
referred  to  in  the  verse  cited  by  Sridhara  Svami  is  not  the  Devi
Bhagavatam.
   Hemadri, Ballal Sena, Govindananda, Raghunandana, Gopala Bhatta  Gosvami,
and Sanatana Gosvami have each written noteworthy dharma-sastras (books  and
essays on religious duties), in which they  quote  frequently  from  Srimad-
Bhagavatam but never from the Devi Bhagavatam. Ballal  Sena  states  in  his
Dana-sagara  that  only  a  few  verses  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  specifically
recommend acts of charity. In contrast, the entire thirtieth chapter of  the
Devi Bhagavatam’s Ninth Canto deals exclusively with  the  glory  of  giving
various kinds of charity. In addition, with the exceptions of  Ramanujacarya
and Nilakanthacarya,  all  the  great  saintly  commentators  on  Prasthana-
trayi[1] either wrote about Srimad-Bhagavatam directly or at least cited  it
as a standard reference  in  their  books.  By  contrast,  neither  Sankara,
Madhvacarya, Vallabha, Lord Caitanyadeva, or any other notable  acarya  ever
cited the Devi Bhagavatam to support or prove any important statement.
   The ninety-sixth chapter of the first part of the Naradiya  Purana  lists
the topics of all twelve cantos of the Bhagavatam in order. This  list  fits
Srimad-Bhagavatam but not the Devi Bhagavatam. And the Padma Purana (Uttara-
khanda 193.3), states:
   puranesu tu sarvesu Srimad-bhagavatam param
   yatra prati-padam krsno giyate bahudharsibhih
“Among all the Puranas, Srimad-Bhagavatam is the best. In every  line  great
sages glorify Lord Krsna in various ways.” All this  leaves  no  doubt  that
the Bhagavatam mentioned in the quoted Puranic verses is Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   Srimad-Bhagavatam and other Puranas mention a demon named Hayagriva,  and
there is also an incarnation of Lord  Visnu  called  Hayagriva,  who  had  a
horse’s head. But because the Hayagriva mentioned in this section of Tattva-
sandarbha is connected with the slaying  of  the  demon  Vrtra,  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami has identified him as the sage Dadhici. As told in the  Sixth  Canto
of  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  after  Vrtra  had  conquered   the   demigods   they
approached Lord Visnu for help. The Lord advised the chief of the  demigods,
Indra, to go to Dadhici and ask him for his body, which had been  made  firm
by vows, penances, and knowledge of Brahman. The Lord told Indra to  fashion
from Dadhici’s bones a thunderbolt strong enough to kill Vrtrasura.
   Dadhici had previously taught the knowledge  of  Brahman  to  the  Asvini
Kumara twins, although  Indra  had  earlier  forbidden  him  to  teach  them
transcendental knowledge  on  the  grounds  that  their  medical  profession
disqualified them from learning it. Indra had threatened to  behead  Dadhici
if he disobeyed, but Dadhici had already promised to teach  the  twins.  The
Asvini- Kumaras had solved Dadhici’s dilemma surgically:  they  severed  his
head and grafted a horse’s head in  its  place,  knowing  that  Indra  would
eventually cut off that head and enable them to restore  Dadhici’s  original
head. Dadhici then instructed them through the horse’s head. Dadhici  became
known as Hayagriva or Asvasira (“horse-headed one”), and the  transcendental
knowledge he  imparted  became  famous  as  the  Hayagriva-brahma-vidya.  As
planned, Indra later severed Dadhici’s horse head  and  the  Asvini  Kumaras
restored his original head. Then, on the request of  the  demigods,  Dadhici
offered his body to Indra, who used his bones to  make  a  thunderbolt  with
which he killed Vrtrasura.  Earlier  Dadhici  had  taught  Tvasta  the  same
knowledge he had previously taught the Asvini Kumaras, and  Tvasta  in  turn
taught it to his son Visvarupa. Visvarupa taught it to  Lord  Indra  as  the
Narayana Armor, which helped Indra  defeat  Vrtrasura.  Thus  the  Hayagriva
referred to here is Dadhici, and the Brahma-vidya  is  the  Narayana  Armor.
This is all described in the Sixth Canto of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  and  in  the
Bhagavatam commentaries of the Vaisnava acaryas.


   TEXT 20.5 contains the term suka-proktam, “recited  by  Sri  Suka.”  From
this term we should not infer that verses Sukadeva Gosvami  did  not  speak,
such as the First Canto, are not part of Srimad-Bhagavatam.  The  Bhagavatam
Vyasa revealed was complete, including future events and  future  statements
by Suta and Saunaka. Since Srimad-Bhagavatam has been identified  as  having
eighteen thousand verses and opening with  a  verse  based  on  the  Gayatri
mantra, it must be that its first verse begins with the words  janmady  asya
yatah and its last one ends with tam namami harim param.
   Of the eighteen Puranas, six  are  meant  for  persons  in  the  mode  of
ignorance, six for those in the mode of passion, and six for  those  in  the
mode of goodness. But Srimad-Bhagavatam  occupies  a  place  of  honor  even
among the sattvic Puranas. It is considered  nondifferent  from  Krsna,  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead,  and  therefore  it  is  parama-sattvika,  a
manifestation of pure goodness without any  tinge  of  the  material  modes.
Hareh santosa-karanam: it is pleasing to Hari, the transcendental Lord,  who
cannot be pleased by anything material. It is relished by His devotees,  who
scoff at the bliss of liberation, what to  speak  of  the  pleasure  derived
from reading something mundane. For this reason the sage Gautama  recommends
reciting Srimad-Bhagavatam on Ekadasi, which  is  also  called  Hari-vasara,
the day of Lord Hari. As the Skanda Purana (Visnu-khanda 6.4.3) states:
   Srimad-bhagavatasyatha Srimad-bhagavatah sada
   svarupam ekam evasti sac-cid-ananda-laksanam
“Srimad-Bhagavatam and the Personality of Godhead are  always  of  the  same
nature—possessed of eternal existence, full knowledge, and complete  bliss.”
And the Padma Purana (Uttara-khanda 198.30)  confirms,  Srimad-bhagavatakhyo
’yam  pratyaksah  krsna  eva  hi:  “Without  a  doubt  Srimad-Bhagavatam  is
directly Lord Krsna.”
   That Srimad-Bhagavatam is nondifferent from Lord Krsna  is  confirmed  in
the Bhagavatam itself (1.3.43), where Suta Gosvami  states  that  after  the
Lord’s disappearance  the  Bhagavatam  appeared  as  His  representative  to
enlighten the benighted people of Kali-yuga. The Padma Purana also  confirms
the oneness of the Bhagavatam and the Lord with this  passage  equating  the
Bhagavatam’s cantos with Krsna’s limbs:
   @vpl1 = padau yadiyau prathama-dvitiyau
   @vpl2 = trtiya-turyau kathitau yad-uru
   @vpl1 = nabhis tatha païcama eva sastho
   @vpl2 = bhujantaram dor-yugalam tathanyau


   @vpl1 = kanthas tu rajan navamo yadiyo
   @vpl2 = mukharavindam dasamam praphullam
   @vpl1 = ekadaso yas ca lalata-pattam
   @vpl2 = siro ’pi yad dvadasa eva bhati


   @vpl1 = namami devam karuna-nidhanam
   @vpl2 = tamala-varnam su-hitavataram
   @vpl1 = apara-samsara-samudra-setum
   @vpl2 = bhajamahe bhagavata-svarupam
“The Bhagavatam’s First and Second Cantos are Lord  Krsna’s  feet,  and  the
Third and Fourth Cantos are His thighs. The Fifth Canto is  His  navel,  the
Sixth Canto is His chest, and the Seventh and Eighth Cantos  are  His  arms.
The Ninth Canto is His throat,  the  Tenth  His  blooming  lotus  face,  the
Eleventh His forehead, and the Twelfth His head.
   “I bow down to that Lord, the ocean of mercy, whose color is like that of
a tamala tree and who appears in this  world  for  the  welfare  of  all.  I
worship Him as the bridge for crossing the unfathomable  ocean  of  material
existence. Srimad-Bhagavatam has appeared as His very self.”
   Next Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  demonstrates  that  Srimad-Bhagavatam  is  the
natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra.


===== TS.21 =====
NUMBER: 21
SOURCE LABEL: Text 21

TEXT 21
   garude ca
   purnah so ’yam atisayah
   artho ’yam brahma-sutranam bharatartha-vinirnayah


   gayatri-bhasya-rupo ’sau vedartha-paribrmhitah
   purananam sama-rupah saksad bhagavatoditah


   dvadasa-skandha-yukto ’yam sata-viccheda-samyutah
   grantho ’stadasa-sahasram Sri-bhagavatabhidhah
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   And the Garuda Purana states:
   “This Srimad-Bhagavatam is the most perfect Purana. It is the natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra,  it  establishes  the  meaning  of  the
Mahabharata, it is a
   COMMENTARY  on Gayatri, it explains and expands the meaning of the Vedas,
it is the Sama Veda of the Puranas, and it was spoken by  the  Supreme  Lord
Himself. It has twelve cantos, hundreds of chapters, and  eighteen  thousand
verses.”


   TEXT 21.2
   brahma-sutranam arthas tesam  akrtrima-bhasya-bhuta  ity  arthah.  purvam
suksmatvena manasy avirbhutam tad eva sanksipya sutratvena punah  prakatitam
pascad vistirnatvena  saksat  Sri-bhagavatam  iti.  tasmat  tad-bhasya-bhute
svatah-siddhe tasmin saty arvacinam  anyad  anyesam  sva-sva-kapola-kalpitam
tad-anugatam evodaraniyam iti gamyate.
   Here the words brahma-sutranam arthah mean that Srimad-Bhagavatam is  the
natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra. First the Bhagavatam  appeared  in  the
heart of Sri Vyasadeva in a subtle form. He then summarized it in  the  form
of the Vedanta-sutra, and later He expanded it into Srimad-Bhagavatam as  we
know it. Since the Vedanta-sutra already has a natural
   COMMENTARY  in Srimad-Bhagavatam, whatever else more recent  commentators
have produced from their own brains should be taken seriously only  when  it
is faithful to the version of Srimad-Bhagavatam.


   TEXT 21.3
   bharatartha-vinirnayah
   nirnayah sarva-sastranam bharatam parikirtitam


   bharatam sarva-vedas ca tulam aropitah pura
   devair brahmadibhih sarvair rsibhis ca samanvitaih


   vyasasyaivajïaya tatra tv atiricyata bharatam
   mahattvad bhara-vattvac ca mahabharatam ucyate
   @VCONTINUE = ity-ady-ukta-laksanasya bharatasyartha-vinirnayo yatra sah.
   Concerning   the   phrase   bharatartha-vinirnayah    (“Srimad-Bhagavatam
establishes the meaning of the Mahabharata”), we find the  following  verses
describing the Mahabharata’s importance  in  the  Mahabharata  itself  [Adi-
parva 1.272–74]:
   “The Mahabharata is glorified because it contains the conclusions of  all
scriptures. Long ago, on the request of Srila Vyasa,  Lord  Brahma  and  the
other demigods came together  with  all  the  great  sages  and  placed  the
Mahabharata on one side of a scale and the entire Vedas on  the  other.  The
Mahabharata,  it  turned  out,  weighed  more  because  of   its   greatness
(mahattva) and heaviness (bhara-vattva). For this reason it is called  Maha-
bharata.” The message of the Mahabharata, whose importance is  as  described
here, is made clear in the
   TEXT of Srimad-Bhagavatam.


   TEXT 21.4
   Sri-bhagavaty eva tatparyam tasyapi. tad  uktam  moksa-dharme  narayaniye
Sri-veda-vyasam prati janamejayena
   idam sata-sahasrad dhi bharatakhyana-vistarat
   amathya mati-manthena jïanodadhim anuttamam


   nava-nitam yatha dadhno malayac candanam yatha
   aranyam sarva-vedebhya osadhibhyo ’mrtam yatha


   samuddhrtam idam brahman kathamrtam idam tatha
   tapo-nidhe tvayoktam hi narayana-kathasrayam
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   Another way in which Srimad-Bhagavatam establishes  the  meaning  of  the
Mahabharata is that the message of  both  culminates  in  the  Supreme  Lord
alone. That the Mahabharata’s message culminates in the Lord is  evinced  in
the  Narayaniya  section   of   the   Mahabharata’s   Moksa-dharma   portion
[170.11–14], where Janamejaya says to Srila Vyasadeva:
   “O brahmana, abode of austerities, just as butter can be  extracted  from
yogurt, sandalwood from the Malaya mountains, the Upanisads from the  Vedas,
and life-giving nectar from herbs, so by Your  churning  the  ocean  of  the
highest knowledge with the rod of Your  intelligence,  this  Narayaniya  has
been  extracted  from  the  Mahabharata’s  hundred  thousand   verses.   The
Narayaniya’s narrations are related to Lord  Narayana  and  are  sweet  like
nectar.”


   COMMENTARY
   Srimad-Bhagavatam Is the Natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra
   Srimad-Bhagavatam is one of the eighteen  Puranas,  but  Srila  Vyasadeva
wrote it after compiling the essence of the Vedas in the  Vedanta-sutra  and
also composing the Mahabharata and Puranas.  But,  one  might  ask,  if  the
eighteen  Puranas  had  already  been  compiled,  does  this  make   Srimad-
Bhagavatam the nineteenth Purana?
   In
   TEXT 21.2 Srila Jiva Gosvami explains that this is not the case.  Srimad-
Bhagavatam appeared first to Srila Vyasa in a concise and  subtle  form,  as
one of the eighteen Puranas. Srila Vyasa composed the Vedanta-sutra  on  the
basis of this first edition of the Bhagavatam. Later, when He sat in  trance
in pursuance of Narada Muni’s order, the expanded form of  Srimad-Bhagavatam
was revealed to Him as the natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra. Srimad-Bhagavatam and the Vedanta-sutra
share the same subject, the Absolute  Truth,  and  they  describe  the  same
principles of  sambandha  (the  relationship  between  the  soul  and  God),
abhidheya (the process of attaining the supreme goal),  and  prayojana  (the
supreme goal, perfect devotion to  the  Lord).  Many  acaryas  and  scholars
wrote later commentaries on the Vedanta-sutra, but  only  those  that  agree
with Srimad-Bhagavatam—such as those given  by  Ramanujacarya,  Madhvacarya,
and Baladeva Vidyabhusana—are bona fide.
   Suta Gosvami alludes to Veda-vyasa’s composing two  editions  of  Srimad-
Bhagavatam:
   sa samhitam bhagavatim krtvanukramya catmajam
   sukam adhyapayam asa nivrtti-niratam munih
   “The great sage Vyasadeva, after compiling Srimad-Bhagavatam and revising
it, taught it to  His  own  son,  Sri  Sukadeva  Gosvami,  who  was  already
absorbed in self-realization”  (Bhag.  1.7.8).  Commenting  on  this  verse,
Srila  Visvanatha   Cakravarti   Thakura   writes,   atas   tadaiva   purva-
nirmitasyaiva Sri-bhagavatasyanukramanam: “The word anukramya in this  verse
means that Veda-vyasa compiled a new edition of the already existing Srimad-
Bhagavatam.”


   TEXT 21.3 relates how the Mahabharata was  once  shown  to  be  literally
heavier than the Vedas. This heaviness came about because  the  Mahabharata,
using simple narrations, elaborated upon and lucidly explained  the  concise
and cryptic subject matter of the Vedas. Vyasadeva makes this point  in  the
Mahabharata itself (Adi-parva 1.62):
   brahman veda-rahasyam ca yac canyat sthapitam maya
   sangopanisadam caiva vedanam vistara-kriya
“O Lord Brahma, in this great work [Mahabharata] I have included the  secret
essence of all the Vedas and of all other scriptures as  well.  It  explains
in detail the Vedas’ six corollaries and the Upanisads.”
   Originally the Mahabharata had six million verses, but  at  present  only
one hundred thousand are available on  earth.  The  rest  can  be  found  on
higher planets, where people have  life  spans  and  memories  suitable  for
absorbing such  large  amounts  of  information.  The  distribution  of  the
Mahabharata’s verses is also mentioned in the Mahabharata itself  (Adi-parva
1.106–107):
   sastim sata-sahasrani cakaranyam sa samhitam
   trimsac chata-sahasram ca deva-loke pratisthitam


   pitrye païcadasa proktam gandharvesu caturdasa
   ekam sata-sahasram tu manusesu pratisthitam
“Then Srila Vyasadeva compiled  another  samhita  [Mahabharata],  containing
six million verses. Of these, three million  are  present  in  the  heavenly
planets, one and a half million on the planet of the  forefathers,  and  one
million  four  hundred  thousand  on  the  planet  of  the  Gandharvas.  The
remaining one hundred thousand verses are available among human beings.”
   Although abridged, the version of  Mahabharata  on  this  planet  is  the
longest epic ever written here. So, due to  the  profundity  of  its  topics
(mahattva) and its great weight (bhara-vattva) it is known as Mahabharata.
   The Mahabharata is more versatile than the Vedas because the restrictions
that apply to studying the Vedas are absent  with  the  Mahabharata.  Anyone
may read and  enjoy  the  Mahabharata,  regardless  of  social  position  or
gender. However, only the Moksa-dharma and  a  few  other  sections  of  the
Mahabharata directly  glorify  Lord  Narayana  as  supreme.  Other  sections
mainly deal with a mixture of topics, such as  fruitive  rituals,  politics,
and charity. By contrast,  the  entire  Bhagavatam  speaks  only  about  the
glories of the Supreme Lord, and this exclusive focus makes it  superior  to
the Mahabharata. Thus it has been said, “Srimad-Bhagavatam  establishes  the
meaning of the Mahabharata.”
   In the next Text,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  cites  further  proof  that  the
Bhagavatam is the essence of all Vedic literature and the topmost pramana.


===== TS.22 =====
NUMBER: 22
SOURCE LABEL: Text 22

TEXT 22.1
   tatha ca trtiye
   @VL1 = munir vivaksur bhagavad-gunanam
   @VL2 = sakhapi te bharatam aha krsnah
   @VL1 = yasmin nrnam gramya-kathanuvadair
   @VL2 = matir grhita nu hareh kathayam
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   Similarly, the Third Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam [3.5.12]  confirms  [that
the Bhagavatam establishes the meaning of the Mahabharata]:
   “Your  friend,  the  great  sage  Krsna-dvaipayana  Vyasa,  has   already
described the transcendental qualities of the Lord in  His  great  work  the
Mahabharata. But the whole idea is to draw the  attention  of  the  mass  of
people to krsna-katha through their  strong  affinity  for  hearing  mundane
topics.”


   TEXT 22.2
   @VCONTINUE = hemadrer vrata-khande
   stri-sudra-dvija-bandhunam trayi na sruti-gocara
   karma-sreyasi mudhanam sreya evam bhaved iha
   iti bharatam akhyanam krpaya munina krtam
   @VCONTINUE = iti vakyam Sri-bhagavatiyatvenotthapya bharatasya  vedartha-
tulyatvena visisya nirnayo krta iti  tan-matanusarena  tv  evam  vyakhyeyam,
bharatarthasya vinirnayo vedartha-tulyatvena visisya nirnayo yatreti.
   In his Catur-varga-cintamani,  Vrata-khanda  [1.28],  Hemadri  cites  the
following verse and attributes it to Srimad-Bhagavatam:
   “Out of compassion, the great sage thought it wise to do  something  that
would enable even those who were ignorant  of  how  to  act  for  their  own
welfare to achieve the ultimate goal of life. Thus  He  compiled  the  great
historical  narration  called  the  Mahabharata  for  women,  laborers,  and
friends of the twice-born because they do not  have  access  to  the  Vedas”
[Bhag. 1.4.25].
   Hemadri uses this  verse  to  demonstrate  that  the  Mahabharata  is  as
valuable as the Vedas, and thus the phrase bharatartha-vinirnayah  (“Srimad-
Bhagavatam  establishes  the  meaning  of  the   Mahabharata”)   should   be
explained, in accordance with this view, as  saying  that  Srimad-Bhagavatam
is the  literature  in  which  the  Mahabharata’s  message  is  conclusively
defined and is shown to be equal to that of the Vedas.


   TEXT 22.3
   yasmad evam bhagavat-paras tasmad eva `yatradhikrtya gayatrim' iti  krta-
laksana-Sri-bhagavata-nama  granthah  Sri-bhagavat-paraya  gayatrya  bhasya-
rupo ’sau. tad uktam `yatradhikrtya gayatrim' ity-adi.
   Since the book named Srimad-Bhagavatam, characterized as “beginning  with
the Gayatri mantra,” is thus dedicated to the  Personality  of  Godhead,  it
serves as a
   COMMENTARY  on Gayatri, which is also dedicated to the Supreme Lord. This
same point—that Srimad-Bhagavatam is a
   COMMENTARY  on the Gayatri mantra—is made in such statements as “in which
[Bhagavatam] Gayatri is introduced as the basis of discussion.”


   TEXT 22.4
   tathaiva  hi  agni-purane  tasya  vyakhyane  Sri-bhagavan  eva  vistarena
pratipaditah. tatra tadiya-vyakhya-dig-darsanam yatha
   taj jyotih paramam brahma bhargas tejo yatah smrtah
   @VCONTINUE = ity arabhya punar aha
   taj jyotir bhagavan visnur jagaj-janmadi-karanam
   sivam kecit pathanti sma sakti-rupam vadanti ca


   kecit suryam kecid agnim daivatany agni-hotrinah
   agny-adi-rupi visnur hi vedadau brahma giyate
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   And furthermore, the Agni Purana describes the Personality of Godhead  at
length in the course of its exposition of the  Gayatri  mantra.  Here  is  a
short summary of this explanation from the Agni Purana:
   “That light is called the Supreme Brahman because the  word  bhargas  [in
Gayatri] means ‘effulgence,’” [Agni Pur. 216.3].
   Then Agni says:
   “That effulgence is Lord Visnu,  who  is  the  cause  of  the  universe’s
creation, maintenance, and dissolution. Some people  say  ‘effulgence’  here
refers instead to Siva, while others say  it  means  Sakti.  Others  say  it
refers to the sun, and still others to Agni.  While  chanting  Gayatri,  the
brahmanas who perform Vedic fire sacrifices  (Agni-hotris)  worship  various
demigods. But Lord Visnu is present in the forms of Agni and all  the  other
demigods, and the Vedas praise Him as the  Absolute  Truth,  Brahman”  [Agni
Pur. 216.7–8].


   TEXT 22.5
   atra `janmady asya' ity asya vyakhyanam ca  tatha  darsayisyate.  `kasmai
yena vibhasito ’yam' ity upasamhara-vakye ca `tac chuddham'  ity-adi-samanam
evagni-purane tad-vyakhyanam
   nityam suddham param brahma nitya-bhargam adhisvaram
   aham jyotih param brahma dhyayema hi vimuktaye
   @VCONTINUE = iti. atra aham brahma iti `nadevo devam arcayet' iti nyayena
yogyatvaya  svasya  tadrktva-bhavana  darsita.  dhyayema  ity   aham   tavad
dhyayeyam sarve ca vayam dhyayemety arthah.
   Later, while commenting on the opening verse of the Bhagavatam (beginning
janmady asya), we will again present this idea of the Bhagavatam’s being a
   COMMENTARY  on Gayatri. Also, in one of  the  concluding  verses  of  the
Bhagavatam ([12.13.19,] beginning  kasmai  yena  vibhasitah),  we  find  the
phrase tac chuddham (“it is pure”), which is  exactly  echoed  in  the  Agni
Purana’s explanation of Gayatri:
   “For liberation, let us meditate on the Supreme Brahman, who is  eternal,
pure,  transcendental,  and  always  effulgent,  and  who  is  the   supreme
controller, and as we meditate let us think, ‘I am that light,  the  Supreme
Truth’” [Agni Pur. 216.6].
   Here the mood of thinking “I am one with Brahman” is meant  to  help  the
meditator become fit to worship the Supreme Lord,  following  the  principle
“One who is not godly cannot properly worship God.” The verb  form  dhyayema
(“we should meditate”) signifies that “not only  I  but  all  of  us  should
meditate.”


   TEXT 22.6
   tad etan-mate tu mantre ’pi bharga-sabdo ’yam ad-anta eva syat. `supam su-
luk'  ity-adina  chandasa-sutrena  tu  dvitiyaika-vacanasya  amah   su-bhavo
jïeyah. yat tu dvadase `om namas te' ity-adi-gadyesu  tad-arthatvena  suryah
stutah, tat paramatma-drstyaiva na tu svatantryenety adosah.
   According to this view, however, the word bharga in  the  Gayatri  mantra
should end with the vowel a, making the  original  word  bharga  instead  of
bhargas. This irregular usage of bhargas where bharga might be expected  can
be explained as an instance of the type given in Panini-sutra 7.1.39,  which
is intended for the analysis of Vedic texts.  The  sutra  is  supam  su-luk,
which means that the suffix  -am  of  a  singular  accusative  case  may  be
replaced by -su.
   In the prose section of the  Bhagavatam’s  Twelfth  Canto  ([12.6.67–72,]
beginning om namas te[2]) the sun is praised as the  object  of  worship  in
Gayatri. We should understand that this  passage  refers  to  the  Supersoul
residing within the sun rather than to the  sun  independently;  interpreted
in this way, the statement is faultless.


   TEXT 22.7
   tathaivagre Sri-saunaka-vakyam
   bruhi nah sraddadhananam vyuham suryatmano hareh
   @VCONTINUE = iti. na  casya  bhargasya  surya-mandala-matradhisthanatvam,
mantre  varenya-sabdena  atra   ca   granthe   para-sabdena   paramaisvarya-
paryantataya darsitatvat.
   Later in the Bhagavatam Saunaka Rsi confirms this interpretation:
   “O Suta, kindly explain to us, who are faithful, the glory of Lord Hari’s
expansion as the Supersoul within the sun” [Bhag. 12.11.28].
   Similarly, one should not think that the word  bharga  (“effulgence”)  in
Gayatri refers only to the controller of  the  sun  globe,  since  the  word
varenya (“transcendental”) in the Gayatri mantra and the word  para  in  the
Bhagavatam verses cited above [1.1.1 and 12.13.19] have both been  shown  to
refer ultimately to the transcendental opulence of the Supreme.


   TEXT 22.8
   tad evam agni-purane ’py uktam
   dhyanena puruso ’yam ca drastavyah surya-mandale
   satyam sada-sivam brahma tad visnoh paramam padam
   @VCONTINUE = iti. tri-loki-jananam upasanartham pralaye  vinasini  surya-
mandale  cantar-yamitaya  pradurbhuto   ’yam   puruso   dhyanena   drastavya
upasitavyah. yat tu visnos tasya maha-vaikuntha-rupam paramam padam tad  eva
satyam kala-trayavyabhicari sada-sivam upadrava-sunyam yato  brahma-svarupam
ity arthah.
   The Agni Purana similarly states:
   “One may further meditate on this Supreme Lord as present in the sun, but
the final goal of life is Lord Visnu’s abode, which  alone  is  the  eternal
and ever-auspicious Absolute Truth” [Agni Pur. 216.16].
   The meaning of this verse is  as  follows:  The  Personality  of  Godhead
should be meditated upon as the Supersoul,  or  inner  controller,  dwelling
within the sun globe, where He appears so that the inhabitants of the  three
worlds may worship Him. This sun globe will be  destroyed  at  the  time  of
dissolution, but the transcendental abode of Lord Visnu, Maha-vaikuntha,  is
permanent, unchanging in the past, present, and future. It  is  also  always
auspicious—that is, free from all disturbance—because it is  identical  with
the Supreme Lord’s own self.


   TEXT 22.9
   tad  etad   gayatrim   procya   purana-laksana-prakarane   `yatradhikrtya
gayatrim' ity-ady apy uktam agni-purane. tasmat
   agneh puranam gayatrim sametya bhagavat-param
   bhagavantam tatra matva jagaj-janmadi-karanam


   yatradhikrtya gayatrim iti laksana-purvakam
   @V1PLUS = Srimad-bhagavatam sasvat prthvyam jayati sarvatah
   tad evam asya sastrasya gayatrim adhikrtya pravrttir darsita.
   After explaining Gayatri in this way, the Agni Purana further  elaborates
on Gayatri in the section  dealing  with  the  characteristics  of  Puranas,
which contains the verse beginning yatra adhikrtya gayatrim. Thus we say:
   “The Agni Purana explains that the Gayatri mantra  is  dedicated  to  the
Personality  of  Godhead,  the  source  of   the   universe’s   maintenance,
dissolution,   and   other   phases   of    existence.    Srimad-Bhagavatam,
characterized by the phrase ‘taking Gayatri as its  topic,’  is  thus  ever-
glorious all over the earth.”
   And so we have shown how it is  that  the  beginning  of  this  scripture
[Srimad-Bhagavatam] refers to Gayatri as its subject.


   TEXT 22.10
   yat  tu  sarasvata-kalpam  adhikrtyeti  purvam  uktam,  tac  ca  gayatrya
bhagavat-pratipadaka-vag-visesa-rupa-sarasvatitvad upayuktam eva. yad  uktam
agni-purane
   gayaty ukthani sastrani bhargam pranams tathaiva ca
   tatah smrteyam gayatri savitri yatra eva ca


   prakasini sa savitur vag-rupatvat sarasvati
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   Still, the statement made earlier—that the Bhagavatam’s  subject  is  the
Sarasvata-kalpa, the day  of  Brahma  related  to  Sarasvati—is  appropriate
because Sarasvati is the goddess of speech, who glorifies the Supreme  Lord.
Gayatri is also a manifestation of Sarasvati as a special verbal  expression
establishing the Lord’s glories. Thus the Agni Purana says about Gayatri:
   “It is called Gayatri because it sings about (gayati) or illuminates  the
Vedic mantras, the scriptures, the Supreme Lord, and one’s intelligence.  It
is called Savitri because it reveals Lord Savita, the  creator.  And  it  is
called Sarasvati because it is the essence of speech” [Agni Pur. 216.1–2].


   TEXT 22.11
   atha krama-prapta vyakhya. tasmat `gayatri-bhasya-rupo ’sau.’ tathaiva hi
visnu-dharmottaradau  tad-vyakhyane  bhagavan  eva  vistarena  pratipaditah.
atra janmady asya ity asya  vyakhyanam  ca  tatha  darsayisyate.  `vedartha-
paribrmhitah'  vedarthasya  paribrmhanam  yasmat.   tac   coktam   `itihasa-
puranabhyam' ity-adi.
   Now we will resume our sequential explanation of the terms in the passage
quoted above from the Garuda Purana [at the beginning of
   TEXT 21]:
   Thus "Srimad-Bhagavatam is a
   COMMENTARY  on Gayatri." This is shown in the  Visnu-dharmottara  Purana,
which elaborately demonstrates, in its explanation  of  the  Gayatri  mantra
[Prathama-khanda 165], that the object of meditation in the Gayatri  is  the
Supreme Lord. We shall provide similar  proofs  of  the  Srimad-Bhagavatam's
being a
   COMMENTARY  on Gayatri this when we comment  on  the  Bhagavatam’s  first
verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam (beginning janmady asya).
   That the Srimad-Bhagavatam explains  and  expands  the  Vedas  (vedartha-
paribrmhitah) is confirmed by the statement in  the  Mahabharata  (Adi-parva
1.267): "One should  supplement the Vedas with the Itihasas and Puranas."


   TEXT 22.12
   `purananam sama-rupah'  vedesu  sama-vat  sa  tesu  srestha  ity  arthah.
puranantaranam    kesaïcid    apatato    rajas-tamasi    jusamanais     tat-
paratvapratitatve ’pi vedanam  kanda-traya-vakyaika-vakyatayam  yatha  samna
tatha tesam Sri-bhagavatena pratipadye Sri-bhagavaty  eva  paryavasanam  iti
bhavah. tad uktam
   vede ramayane caiva purane bharate tatha
   adav ante ca madhye ca harih sarvatra giyate
   @VCONTINUE = iti pratipadayisyate ca tad idam paramatma-sandarbhe.
   The phrase purananam sama-rupa means that just as the Sama  Veda  is  the
supreme Veda, so Srimad-Bhagavatam is the supreme Purana. The idea  here  is
as follows: The Sama Veda reconciles the statements of the  three  divisions
of the Vedas—karma-kanda, jïana-kanda,  and  upasana-kanda—by  showing  that
their message is one. Similarly, Srimad-Bhagavatam shows that although  some
of the  Puranas  appear  to  be  tainted  with  the  modes  of  passion  and
ignorance, the essence of all the Puranas is worship of  the  Supreme  Lord.
Thus it is said:
   “Throughout the Vedas, Ramayana, Puranas, and Mahabharata, Lord  Hari  is
glorified everywhere, in  the  beginning,  middle,  and  end”  [Mahabharata,
Svarga-parva 6.93]. This  we  will  demonstrate  later,  in  the  Paramatma-
sandarbha (68–73).


   TEXT 22.13
   `saksad bhagavatoditah' iti `kasmai yena vibhasito ’yam’ ity  upasamhara-
vakyanusarena  jïeyam.   `sata-viccheda-samyutah'   iti   vistara-bhiya   na
vivriyate. tad evam Sri-bhagavatam sarva-sastra-cakravarti-padam  aptam  iti
sthite `hema-simha-samanvitam' ity atra `suvarna-simhasanarudham' iti  tika-
karair      vyakhyatam      tad      eva      yuktam.      atah      Srimad-
bhagavatasyaivabhyasavasyakatvam sresthatvam ca skande nirnitam.
   That Srimad-Bhagavatam is saksad bhagavatoditah (“spoken directly by  the
Supreme Lord”) is confirmed in the verse near  the  end  of  the  Bhagavatam
beginning kasmai yena vibhasitah, wherein it is said, “We meditate upon  the
Supreme Lord, who spoke this Srimad-Bhagavatam to Brahma” [Bhag. 12.13.19].
   Here we will not  explain  the  phrase  sata-viccheda-samyutah  (“Srimad-
Bhagavatam contains hundreds of divisions”) because we  are  concerned  that
this book may become too long.
   In this way it has been shown that Srimad-Bhagavatam is  the  emperor  of
all scriptures. And thus it is most  appropriate  that  Sridhara  Svami  has
interpreted  the  phrase   hema-simha-samanvitam   [from   Srimad-Bhagavatam
12.13.13] to mean “mounted on  a  golden  throne,”  although  ordinarily  it
would mean “along with a golden lion.”
   In this way we ascertain from the evidence  of  the  Skanda  Purana  that
Srimad-Bhagavatam is the best scripture and the only one we need to study.


   TEXT 22.14


   ata eva skande
   sataso ’tha sahasrais ca kim anyaih sastra-sangrahaih
   na yasya tisthate gehe sastram bhagavatam kalau


   katham sa vaisnavo jïeyah sastram bhagavatam kalau
   grhe na tisthate yasya sa viprah sva-pacadhamah


   yatra yatra bhaved vipra sastram bhagavatam kalau
   tatra tatra harir yati tridasaih saha narada


   yah pathet prayato nityam slokam bhagavatam mune
   astadasa-purananam phalam prapnoti manavah
   @VCONTINUE = iti.
   Therefore the Skanda Purana says:
   “In Kali-yuga what is the value of collecting hundreds  of  thousands  of
other scriptures if one does not keep Srimad-Bhagavatam at home? How  can  a
person be considered a Vaisnava in Kali-yuga if Srimad-Bhagavatam  finds  no
place in his house? Even if he is a learned brahmana, such a  person  should
be considered lower than a dog-eater. O learned  brahmana  Narada,  wherever
Srimad-Bhagavatam is present in  Kali-yuga,  there  the  Supreme  Lord  goes
along with the demigods. A  person  who  faithfully  recites  one  verse  of
Srimad-Bhagavatam every day, O  sage,  attains  the  fruit  of  reading  the
eighteen Puranas” [Skanda Pur., Visnu-khanda 5.16.40, 42, 44, 331].


   TEXT 22.15
   `sata-viccheda-samyutah'    païca-trimsad-adhika-sata-trayadhyaya-visista
ity  arthah.  spastartham  anyat.  tad  evam   paramartha-vivitsubhih   Sri-
bhagavatam eva sampratam vicaraniyam iti sthitam.
   The  phrase  sata-viccheda-samyutah  (“having  hundreds  of   divisions”)
implies that the Bhagavatam has three hundred and thirty-five chapters.  The
meaning of the rest of the passage [quoted at the beginning of
   TEXT 21] is obvious. Thus we have established that at  the  present  time
those who want to know the highest goal of life should deliberate on Srimad-
Bhagavatam alone.


   COMMENTARY
   Srimad-Bhagavatam Is the Essence of All Vedic Literature
   In the previous Text, Srila Jiva Gosvami quoted  three  verses  from  the
Garuda Purana. He explained the first of these in  that  Text,  and  now  he
explains the other two. First he quotes a  Bhagavatam  verse  (3.5.12),  and
then  another  (1.4.25),  which  also  appears  in  Hemadri’s   Catur-varga-
cintamani, an authoritative 13th-century work on Dharma-sastra dealing  with
such subjects as vratas (vows), dana (charity), sraddha (memorial  rituals),
and kala (considerations of  time).  Jiva  Gosvami’s  intention  in  quoting
these verses is to show that the Mahabharata is equal to the Vedas. In  this
part of the Catur-varga-cintamani,  Hemadri  raises  a  question  about  the
salvation of those who are not twice-born: Since they do not have access  to
the Vedas, which give  knowledge  about  Brahman,  and  since  knowledge  of
Brahman is required for salvation, how can they be saved?  To  resolve  this
question he quotes Srimad-Bhagavatam’s  description  (in  verse  1.4.25)  of
Srila Veda-vyasa’s writing Mahabharata to solve this very problem.
   The first of the two Bhagavatam verses cited (3.5.12)  also  states  that
Srila Vyasa compiled the Mahabharata to attract  common  people  toward  the
glories of the  Personality  of  Godhead  by  enticing  them  to  listen  to
seemingly mundane stories. To fulfill this plan He  included  the  Bhagavad-
gita in the Mahabharata. Since the Mahabharata is considered  equal  to  the
Vedas in purpose, as is evident from the second verse  (Bhag.  1.4.25),  and
as corroborated by Hemadri, we  can  deduce  that  the  Vedas  also  aim  at
glorifying the Supreme Lord.
   This being so, the Gayatri mantra, which represents the  essence  of  the
Vedas, should also refer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead,  Sri  Krsna.
It is with this understanding that  the  Skanda  Purana  says  that  Srimad-
Bhagavatam, which glorifies the Lord at every step,  is  based  on  Gayatri.
Indeed, as we have seen, this is one of the distinctive  characteristics  of
Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   In the Paramatma-sandarbha, Srila Jiva Gosvami  will  analyze  the  first
verse of Srimad-Bhagavatam in terms of  its  being  an  explanation  of  the
Gayatri mantra. Gayatri  is  explained  in  the  concluding  verses  of  the
Bhagavatam as well. This  combination  of  indications  from  beginning  and
ending verses makes it indisputably clear that  Srimad-Bhagavatam’s  purpose
is to explain the Personality of Godhead.
   The prevalent understanding among  traditional  Vedic  scholars  is  that
Gayatri is meant for worshiping either the sun-god  or  impersonal  Brahman.
Srila Jiva Gosvami here establishes,  however,  that  the  real  meaning  of
Gayatri is the worship of Lord Visnu, who is nondifferent from  Lord  Krsna.
To support his opinion he cites the Agni Purana, which gives  Srila  Vyasa’s
opinion  on  the  meaning  of  Gayatri.  In  the  Visnu-dharmottara   Purana
(Prathama-khanda,  165th  chapter),  King  Vajra  asks  Markandeya  Rsi  why
Gayatri is chanted in Vaisnava sacrifices if its presiding deity is the sun-
god. Markandeya replies that Gayatri refers  to  Lord  Visnu,  and  then  he
proceeds to show how each word of Gayatri is  related  to  Lord  Visnu.  His
explanation concludes with this verse:
   kama-kamo labhet kamam gati-kamas tu sad-gatim
   akamas tu tad avapnoti yad visnoh paramam padam
“A person desiring material gain or liberation in the next life can  achieve
either by chanting Gayatri, but the  worshiper  who  is  devoid  of  desires
attains the supreme abode of Lord  Visnu.”  It  would  not  be  possible  to
attain the Lord’s abode by meditating on Gayatri  if  it  did  not  in  fact
express worship of Lord Visnu; this accords with the  Lord’s  own  statement
in the Bhagavad-gita (9.25)  that  “Only  My  worshiper  attains  Me.”  Thus
Gayatri and the first verse of the  Bhagavatam  are  in  complete  agreement
because they are both meditations on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
   The verse cited from the Agni Purana in
   TEXT 22.5, advising us  to  meditate  on  Brahman  as  nondifferent  from
ourselves, is also in agreement with the Bhagavatam and Gayatri.  The  verse
is meant to remind us of our spiritual nature,  to  teach  us  a  meditation
that removes our  bodily  identification  and  thus  helps  us  worship  the
Supreme Lord. In the later Texts of the Tattva-sandarbha Srila Jiva  Gosvami
will discuss in more detail the  qualitative  oneness  of  the  jiva-Brahman
with the Supreme Brahman.
   In Texts 22.6–8, Srila Jiva Gosvami discusses  the  relationship  between
Gayatri  and  the  sun.  Srimad-Bhagavatam  (12.6.67–72)  records  the  sage
Yajïavalkya’s prayers in praise of the sun or  sun-god,  among  which  texts
67–69 explain the three legs of the Gayatri mantra. From  these  prayers  it
may seem that Gayatri is also meant for glorifying the  sun-god,  but  Srila
Jiva Gosvami  explains  that  Yajïavalkya  is  not  worshiping  the  sun-god
independently; rather, he is worshiping the Supersoul  dwelling  within  the
sun-god. Generally people hail a taxi driver by  calling  out  “Taxi!”,  not
“Taxi driver!”, for they regard  the  driver  and  his  taxi  as  one  unit.
Similarly, Yajïavalkya worships the sun-god while considering “the  vehicle”
(the sun-god) and “the driver” (the Supersoul) as one. This  explanation  by
Jiva Gosvami finds confirmation in Sri Saunaka’s question  to  Suta  Gosvami
that led to the recitation  of  Yajïavalkya’s  prayers.  Saunaka  explicitly
requests “to hear  about  Lord  Hari,  the  Supersoul  of  the  sun”  (Bhag.
12.11.28).
   Brahmanas customarily chant Gayatri at dawn and at dusk while facing  the
sun. In this way they meditate on the Supreme  Lord  through  His  energies.
The logical principle at work here is  called  candra-sakha-nyaya,  or  “the
example of the branch and the moon.” The idea is that to  show  someone  the
moon you may first ask him to look at a tree  branch,  from  which  you  may
then draw his attention to  the  moon  beyond  the  branch.  Similarly,  the
process of meditating on the Lord may include allowing  one’s  attention  to
be drawn to the Lord through His energies,  such  as  the  sun.  It  is  not
always practical or advisable for a twice-born brahmana to carry  an  actual
Deity of the Lord, but still he must perform his daily  duty  of  meditating
on the Lord at dawn and dusk. So the Vedas enjoin that  he  should  meditate
on the Lord through the medium of the ever-present sun,  always  remembering
that beyond the effulgent sun is Lord Visnu. This is called pratikopasana.
   Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  concludes  his  discussion  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam’s
relationship with Gayatri in
   TEXT 22.10, where he quotes a statement from the Agni Purana that Gayatri
is so called because it sings (gayati) or illuminates  the  glories  of  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and protects (trayate) the chanter by  fixing
his mind on the Lord. Gayatri is related with the sun  because  one  of  the
words used in Gayatri is Savita, a name for the sun-god.  Moreover,  another
name for Gayatri is Savitri, the daughter of the sun-god.  Gayatri  is  also
Sarasvati,  the  presiding  deity  of  speech,  because  it  is  the   sound
representation of the Supreme Lord. The Skanda Purana therefore  states  (as
quoted in
   TEXT 20.1) that the Bhagavatam is based on Gayatri (Sarasvati),  that  it
is the sound representation of Krsna, and  that  it  recounts  events  which
occurred during the Sarasvata-kalpa. All this implies that the  Bhagavatam’s
narrations glorify only Krsna.
   In
   TEXT 22.11 Srila Jiva Gosvami resumes his analysis of each phrase of  the
verses from the Garuda Purana quoted in
   TEXT 21. In these verses Srimad-Bhagavatam is described as “the Sama Veda
among the Puranas.” Lord Krsna makes a similar statement  in  the  Bhagavad-
gita (10.22), where He says, “Of all the Vedas I am  the  Sama  Veda.”  Here
Krsna indicates that since the Sama Veda is  the  best  of  all  the  Vedas,
containing beautiful prayers  glorifying  the  Supreme  Lord,  it  therefore
represents Him. Such glorification of the Lord is  after  all  the  ultimate
purpose of the Vedas, as Srimad-Bhagavatam  (1.2.28)  states:  vasudeva-para
vedah. The karma-kanda and jïana-kanda portions of the Vedas  glorify  Krsna
indirectly, while the Sama Veda glorifies Him directly, and therefore it  is
the most important of the Vedas. Like the Vedas, the  Puranas  also  glorify
various   deities,   although   their   underlying   purpose   is    Krsna’s
glorification, and Srimad-Bhagavatam is the  Sama  Veda  among  the  Puranas
because it focuses exclusively on Krsna. It  reconciles  the  other  Puranas
just as the Sama Veda  reconciles  the  Vedas’  various  kandas.  Thus,  the
Skanda Purana declares, by studying Srimad-Bhagavatam one gets  the  benefit
of studying all the Puranas.
   The very name of Srimad-Bhagavatam reveals its superior position.  Srimat
means “beautiful,” and  bhagavata  means  “related  to  the  Supreme  Lord.”
Srimad-Bhagavatam is thus the most beautiful literary  creation  because  it
describes the beautiful pastimes of the Supreme Person.  Srimat  also  means
“opulent.” Srimad-Bhagavatam is most opulent because it  is  identical  with
Bhagavan, the Personality of Godhead replete with all opulences.
   Sata-viccheda-samyutah literally means that the Bhagavatam “has  hundreds
of sections.” Although Srila Jiva Gosvami does not comment  in  detail  upon
this phrase here, we may point out that  most  editions  of  the  Bhagavatam
have  335  chapters,  divided  into  twelve  cantos,   but   some   Vaisnava
commentators  acknowledge  only  332  chapters.  They  claim  that  chapters
Twelve, Thirteen, and  Fourteen  of  the  Tenth  Canto  are  interpolations.
However,  such  great  authorities  as  Sridhara  Svami  and  Vopadeva  have
accepted these three chapters as authentic and commented on them, and  Srila
Jiva Gosvami has done so as well. The three chapters  in  question  describe
the killing of Aghasura and Lord Brahma’s bewilderment by Krsna. In  Chapter
Twelve of the Twelfth Canto,  Suta  Gosvami  gives  a  list  of  the  Lord’s
pastimes, and in the twenty-eighth
   TEXT of that list he mentions the killing of Aghasura and  Lord  Brahma’s
bewilderment. This  inclusion  of  the  pastimes  from  the  three  disputed
chapters  clearly  indicates  that  these  chapters  have  a  place  in  the
Bhagavatam. Thus in  the  opinion  of  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  the  Bhagavatam
contains 335 chapters, since otherwise it would fall short of  the  required
eighteen thousand verses.
   Commenting on the phrase hema-simha-samanvitam  (Bhag.  12.13.13),  which
literally means “together with a golden lion,”  Srila  Sridhara  Svami  says
that simha (lion) indicates a  simha-asana,  or  Deity’s  throne.  In  other
words, Srimad-Bhagavatam recommends that  one  mount  the  Bhagavatam  on  a
golden throne and then donate it. A golden throne  is  not  recommended  for
any other Purana. Srila Jiva Gosvami concludes, therefore, that just as  the
lion is the emperor of  all  animals,  Srimad-Bhagavatam  is  the  sovereign
ruler of all scriptures. Consequently it is also the sovereign  ruler  among
all pramanas, and, as the Skanda Purana  recommends,  a  person  wishing  to
understand the Absolute Reality need not study any other scripture.
   Next Srila Jiva Gosvami describes how all the great acaryas and  scholars
of the past held Srimad-Bhagavatam in the highest esteem.


===== TS.23 =====
NUMBER: 23
SOURCE LABEL: Text 23

TEXT 23.1
   ata eva satsv api  nana-sastresv  etad  evoktam  `kalau  nasta-drsam  esa
puranarko ’dhunoditah' iti. arkata-rupakena tad vina nanyesam  samyag-vastu-
prakasakatvam iti pratipadyate. yasyaiva  Srimad-bhagavatasya  bhasya-bhutam
Sri-hayasirsa-païcaratre     sastra-kathana-prastave     ganitam     tantra-
bhagavatabhidham  tantram.  yasya  saksat  Sri-hanumad-bhasya-vasana-bhasya-
sambandhokti-vidvat-kamadhenu-tattva-dipika-bhavartha-dipika-paramahamsa-
priya-suka-hrdayadayo vyakhya-granthas  tatha  mukta-phala-hari-lila-bhakti-
ratnavaly-adayo nibandhas ca vividha eva tat-tan-mata-prasiddha-mahanubhava-
krta virajante.
   Thus  while  there  are  many  authoritative  scriptures,  only   Srimad-
Bhagavatam has been glorified with the statement “For  the  blind  souls  of
Kali-yuga, this Purana has now risen like  the  sun”  [Bhag.  1.3.43].  This
comparison of the Bhagavatam to the sun  indicates  that  without  its  help
other scriptures cannot illuminate the Absolute Truth.
   The Hayasirsa Païcaratra, in its chapter classifying various  scriptures,
describes the Tantra-bhagavata as essentially a
   COMMENTARY   on  Srimad-Bhagavatam.   Among   the   Bhagavatam’s   direct
commentaries are the Hanumad-bhasya,  Vasana-bhasya,  Sambandhokti,  Vidvat-
kamadhenu, Tattva-dipika,  Bhavartha-dipika,  Paramahamsa-priya,  and  Suka-
hrdaya;[3] there are also many works written about  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  such
as Mukta-phala, Hari-lila, and Bhakti-ratnavali. All these works  have  been
produced by the most eminent  thinkers  of  their  respective  philosophical
schools.


   TEXT 23.2
   yad eva ca hemadri-granthasya  dana-khande  purana-dana-prastave  mastya-
puraniya-tal-laksana-dhrtya  prasastam.   hemadri-parisesa-khandasya   kala-
nirnaye ca kali-yuga-dharma-nirnaye `kalim  sabhajayanty  aryah'  ity-adikam
yad-vakyatvenotthapya   yat-pratipadita-dharma   eva    kalav    angi-krtah,
samvatsara-pradipe ca tat-kartra `sataso ’tha sahasrais ca' ity-adikam prag-
darsitam skanda-vacana-jatam utthapya sarva-kala-dosatah pavitryaya  katicit
Sri-bhagavata-vacanani lekhyaniti likhitani.
   Srimad-Bhagavatam  is  also  glorified  in  the  Dana-khanda  section  of
Hemadri’s Catur-varga-cintamani. His chapter  entitled  “Giving  Puranas  in
Charity” praises Srimad-Bhagavatam by noting that it possesses the  defining
characteristics specified in the Matsya Purana [53.20–22].
   In the Parisesa-khanda of the same book,  in  the  Kala-nirnaya  section,
where Hemadri defines the appropriate religion for Kali-yuga, he quotes  the
Bhagavatam verse beginning kalim sabhajayanty aryah (11.5.36). In  this  way
he recognizes as appropriate for this  age  only  the  religious  principles
established in Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   And in Samvatsara-pradipaAnd in a passage , that  quotes  the  previously
cited series of statements from the Skanda  Purana,  beginning  sataso  ’tha
sahasrais ca,with "What is the use of collecting hundreds and  thousands  of
scriptures"  is  quoted,  and   thein  Samvatsara-pradipa  includes  several
verses of Srimad-Bhagavatam that are meant to be have been written into  the

   TEXT for being copied out as an exercisze by one  who  wishes  to  purify
himself for self-purification from all the faults caused  by  of  living  in
this age.


   TEXT 23.3
   atha yad eva kaivalyam apy atikramya bhakti-sukha-vyaharadi-lingena nija-
matasyapy upari virajamanartham  matva  yad  apauruseyam  vedanta-vyakhyanam
bhayad acalayataiva sankaravatarataya  prasiddhena  vaksyamana-sva-gopanadi-
hetuka-bhagavad-ajïa-pravartitadvaya-vadenapi etan-matra-varnita-visva-rupa-
darsana-krta-vrajesvari-vismaya-Sri-vraja-kumari-vasana-cauryadikam
govindastakadau  varnayata  tata-sthi-bhuya  nija-vacah-saphalyaya   sprstam
iti.
   It is widely acknowledged that Sri Sankaracarya is an incarnation of Lord
Siva. Sankaracarya understood the importance  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  which,
with its statements about the bliss of pure  devotional  service  surpassing
even the joy of impersonal liberation, proves superior to  his  doctrine  of
impersonalism. He dared not interpret the Bhagavatam, for he  recognized  it
as an exposition of Vedanta philosophy that is without human author.  As  we
shall explain later, on the Supreme Lord’s  order  Sankaracarya  taught  his
doctrine of monism to conceal the Lord’s identity, but still,  to  make  his
own  words  successful  by  saying  something  about  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  he
touched on it indirectly, describing in his  Govindastaka  and  other  hymns
certain pastimes of Lord Krsna’s that are related only  in  the  Bhagavatam.
These include Mother Yasoda’s amazement at seeing  Krsna’s  universal  form,
and His stealing the clothes of the young damsels of Vraja.


   COMMENTARY
   Srimad-Bhagavatam Is Luminous Like the Sun
   Although there are numerous works of Vedic literature, when  Saunaka  Rsi
questioned Sri Suta Gosvami about where  religion  would  take  shelter  now
that Lord Krsna had  returned  to  His  own  abode,  Suta  compared  Srimad-
Bhagavatam to the sun because it shines the light of the Absolute  Truth  so
brightly that it can dissipate the dense darkness of the Kali Age. When  the
sun rises, rogues and thieves hide and ordinary people become  fearless  and
active. Similarly, when Srimad-Bhagavatam is  read,  lust  and  greed  leave
one’s heart and one becomes qualified  to  engage  in  the  service  of  the
Supreme  Lord.  Hence  great  saints  and  thinkers  have  revered   Srimad-
Bhagavatam by writing commentaries and essays on it.
   This practice continues in modern times. Among such contemporary  saintly
persons, the most noteworthy is His Divine Grace  Om  Visnupada  Paramahamsa
Parivrajakacarya A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, who was  not  only  a
scholar of the Bhagavatam but a perfect  embodiment  of  its  teachings.  He
tirelessly imparted its philosophy up to the last moments before  he  passed
away. By presenting Srimad-Bhagavatam in English with an elaborate
   COMMENTARY , he made the message  of  the  Bhagavatam  both  unmistakably
clear and widely accessible for the first time. Through  his  efforts,  many
souls indulging in every sort of roguish vice have had a chance to read  the
glorious Bhagavatam and have thus undergone a change  of  heart.  They  have
left their degraded life and taken to the devotional service of  Krsna,  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This practical evidence leaves no  room  for
doubting the potency of Srimad-Bhagavata Purana.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami again refers to the Catur-varga-cintamani (Dana-khanda
7) of Hemadri,  who  recommends  that  one  donate  Srimad-Bhagavatam  after
mounting it on a  golden  throne,  and  who  glorifies  it  for  having  the
defining characteristics described in the Matsya Purana (see
   TEXT 19). While determining the religion for this age in  the  fourteenth
chapter of his  Catur-varga-cintamani,  Parisesa-khanda,  Hemadri  quotes  a
Bhagavatam verse (11.5.36):
   kalim sabhajayanty arya guna-jïah sara-bhaginah
   yatra sankirtanenaiva sarvah svartho ’bhilabhyate
“Those who are actually advanced in knowledge are  able  to  appreciate  the
essential value of this Age of Kali. Such enlightened persons worship  Kali-
yuga because in this fallen  age  all  perfection  of  life  can  easily  be
achieved by the performance of sankirtana.”
   Commenting on the word sankirtana, Hemadri declares that  hari-sankirtana
is the only  way  to  reach  perfection.  Then  he  quotes  the  next  verse
(11.5.37):
   na hy atah paramo labho dehinam bhramyatam iha
   yato vindeta paramam santim nasyati samsrtih
“Indeed, there is no higher possible  gain  for  embodied  souls  forced  to
wander throughout the material world  than  the  Supreme  Lord’s  sankirtana
movement, by which one can attain the supreme peace and  free  oneself  from
the cycle of repeated birth and death.”
   In this way Hemadri recognizes the authority of Srimad-Bhagavatam in  the
matter of establishing the principles of religion for Kali-yuga.
   Sankaracarya respected Srimad-Bhagavatam both by not commenting on it and
by composing prayers based  on  its  narrations.  One  such  prayer  is  his
Govindastaka:


   satyam jïanam anantam nityam anakasam paramakasam
      gostha-prangana-ringana-lolam anayasam paramayasam
   maya-kalpita-nana-karam anakaram bhuvanakaram
      ksamaya natham anatham pranamata govindam paramanandam
“Please bow down to Govinda, supreme bliss personified. He is  the  Absolute
Truth, as well as unlimited and eternal  knowledge.  Though  different  from
the sky, He Himself is the supreme sky. Though He  effortlessly  rolled  and
frolicked in the courtyards of Vraja, He appeared to  become  tired.  Though
formless, He manifests in various forms fashioned  by  Maya,  including  the
form of the universe. Though He shelters all the universes,  He  appears  to
need shelter.”
   mrtsnam atsiheti yasoda-tadana-saisava-santrasam
      vyadita-vaktralokita-lokaloka-caturdasa-lokalim
   loka-traya-pura-mula-stambham lokalokam analokam
      lokesam paramesam pranamata govindam paramanandam
“Please bow down to Govinda, supreme bliss personified.  Though  He  is  the
supreme master of the universe, He  seemed  to  become  frightened  like  an
ordinary infant when Mother Yasoda chastised Him. When she asked,  “Are  You
eating mud?” He opened His mouth to prove He  had  not—and  showed  her  the
fourteen  planetary  systems,  including  Lokaloka  Mountain.  He   is   the
supporting pillar for this citylike universe of three worlds. Though  He  is
beyond all vision, He is the source of everyone’s vision.
   trai-vistapa-ripu-vira-ghnam ksiti-bhara-ghnam bhava-roga-ghnam
      kaivalyam navanitaharam anaharam bhuvanaharam
   vaimalya-sphuta-ceto-vrtti-visesabhasam anabhasam
      saivam kevala-santam pranamata govindam paramanandam
“Please bow down to Govinda, supreme  bliss  personified.  He  relieves  the
earth of its burden by killing the demigods’ enemies,  the  demons,  and  He
grants liberation by curing the disease  of  materialism.  Though  He  never
needs to eat, still He eats butter, and He also devours the  whole  universe
at  the  time  of  annihilation.  Though  distinct  from  all   the   shadow
manifestations of this world, He manifests in the sanctified  desires  of  a
pure heart. He is most auspicious and peaceful.”
   gopalam bhu-lila-vigraha-gopalam kula-gopalam
      gopi-khelana-govardhana-dhrta-lila-lalita-gopalam
   gobhir nigadita-govinda-sphuta-namanam bahu-namanam
      gopi-gocara-duram pranamata govindam paramanandam
“Please bow down to Govinda, supreme bliss personified.  That  protector  of
cows appeared in the form of a cowherd among the  cowherds  to  perform  His
pastimes on earth, such as lifting Govardhana Hill to protect  the  cowherds
and dallying with the cowherd damsels. Even the cows called Him by the  name
Govinda. He has unlimited names, is distinct among the cowherd boys, and  is
beyond the reach of the gopis’ senses [when He goes  to  the  forest  during
the day, or when He resides in Mathura or Dvaraka].”
   gopi-mandala-gosthi-bhedam bhedavastham abhedabham
      sasvad go-khura-nirdhutoddhat-dhuli-dhusara-saubhagyam
   sraddha-bhakti-grhitanandam acintyam cintita-sad-bhavam
      cintamanim ahimanam pranamata govindam paramanandam
“Please bow down to  Govinda,  supreme  bliss  personified.  He  enters  the
assembly of cowherd damsels and divides them into groups for  His  pastimes.
He is simultaneously different from and one with  everything.  He  considers
it His good fortune to be always smeared with the dust raised by  the  cows’
hooves. He is pleased by faith and devotion.  Though  He  is  inconceivable,
His pastimes are the object of  meditation.  He  is  like  a  transcendental
touchstone.”
   snana-vyakula-yosid-vastram upadayagam uparudham
      vyaditsantir atha dig-vastra hy upadatum upakarsantam
   nirdhuta-dvaya-soka-vimoham buddham buddher antah-stham
      satta-matra-sariram pranamata govindam paramanandam
“Please bow down  to  Govinda,  supreme  bliss  personified.  He  stole  the
bathing damsels’ clothes and climbed a tree with them, and  when  the  naked
maidens asked for their clothes back,  He  told  them  to  come  closer.  He
dispels lamentation and delusion. He is knowledge personified,  realized  by
intelligence, and is also the personification of pure existence.”
   kantam karana-karanam adim anadim kalam anabhasam
      kalindi-gata-kaliya-sirasi muhur muhuh sunrtyantam
   kalam kala-kalatitam kalitasesam kali-dosa-ghnam
      kala-traya-gati-hetum pranamata govindam paramanandam
“Please  bow  down  to  Govinda,  supreme  bliss  personified.  He  is  most
beautiful. He is the original cause of all causes, and He has no  cause.  He
is free from all superimpositions of illusion. He danced wonderfully on  the
hoods of the Kaliya serpent in the Yamuna. Though He is time, He  is  beyond
all divisions of time. He knows everything, He destroys the defects of Kali-
yuga, and He is the source of past, present, and future.”
   vrndavana-bhuvi vrndaraka-gana-vrndaradhyam vande ’ham
      kundabhamala-manda-smera-sudhanandam suhrd-anandam
   vandyasesa-maha-muni-manasa-vandyananda-pada-dvandvam
      vandyasesa-gunabdhim pranamata govindam paramanandam
“Please bow down to Govinda, supreme bliss personified. He is the  reservoir
of all worshipable qualities. All worshipable saintly  persons  worship  His
blissful lotus feet within their hearts. He is my worshipful Lord.  All  the
demigods, and Srimati  Vrndadevi  as  well,  worship  Him  in  the  land  of
Vrndavana. His pure and beautiful smile emanates bliss like a  kunda  flower
pouring forth  nectar.  He  gives  transcendental  ecstasy  to  His  cowherd
friends.”
   govindastakam etad adhite govindarpita-ceta yo
      govindacyuta madhava visno gokula-nayaka krsneti
   govindanghri-saroja-dhyana-sudha-jala-dhauta-samastagho
      govindam paramanandamrtam antah-sthah sa samabhyeti
“Anyone who who recites this Govindastaka, who fixes his  mind  on  Govinda,
and who sweetly chants, ‘O Govinda, Acyuta, Madhava,  Visnu,  Gokula-nayaka,
Krsna,’ thus cleansing away  all  his  sins  with  the  ambrosial  water  of
meditation on the lotus feet of Lord  Govinda—such  a  soul  will  certainly
attain Lord Govinda, the supreme, everlasting bliss of the heart.”
   The Personality of Godhead Govinda ordered Lord Siva  to  take  birth  as
Sankara  to  propagate  impersonalism.  Then  from  the  Mayavada  viewpoint
Sankaracarya  wrote  commentaries  on  the  Vedanta-sutra,  eleven  of   the
principal Upanisads, the Bhagavad-gita, and Sri Visnu-sahasra-nama.  He  did
not interpret Srimad-Bhagavatam, however,  because  he  considered  it  very
dear to the Lord and His devotees, and  also  nondifferent  from  the  Lord.
There can be no doubt about Lord  Siva’s  appreciation  of  the  Bhagavatam,
since in the Twelfth Canto Siva is described as the  greatest  Vaisnava.  As
such, he must be fully aware that it is the supreme pramana, and so  out  of
respect he did not interpret it.
   From the Padma Purana (Uttara-khanda 71.107)  we  learn  how  Lord  Visnu
ordered Siva to propagate monism:
   svagamaih kalpitais tvam ca janan mad-vimukhan kuru
   mam ca gopaya yena syat srstir esottarottara
“[Lord Visnu said:] O Siva, make people averse to Me by writing  speculative
scriptures and thus hiding My glories. In this way  the  world’s  population
will increase.”
   The import of this order is as follows: When Lord Buddha’s teachings were
predominant in India, people  grew  contemptuous  of  the  Vedas  and  Vedic
rituals. They became sunyavadis, or voidists, and Vedic religious  practices
decreased almost to nil. In this condition the people were not  prepared  to
hear  seriously  about  the   personality   of   the   Supreme   Lord,   His
transcendental, eternal, blissful form, or His variegated abode. They  would
have simply blasphemed these teachings, and then they would have  been  left
with no way to purify their hearts. So the first task in bridging  the  wide
gap between voidism and personalism was to reawaken people’s  faith  in  the
Vedas. It was for this purpose  that  Sankaracarya  introduced  his  Advaita
version  of  monism,  a  philosophy   intermediate   between   voidism   and
personalism. Going from the Buddhist nasti to the Mayavada  neti,  neti—from
“The Absolute is  nothing”  to  “The  Absolute  is  something  but  contains
nothing”—is a simple, incremental move, for  the  difference  between  these
two ideas is hardly noticeable. Still, because Sankara based his  philosophy
on the Upanisads, Vedanta-sutra, and other Vedic works, that  one  step  was
critical in bringing the populace back to accepting  the  authority  of  the
Vedas.
   Later in the Uttara-khanda of Padma  Purana  (236.7)  Lord  Siva  himself
describes Advaita  monism  as  veiled  Buddhism:  maya-vadam  asac  chastram
pracchanam bauddham ucyate. “Mayavada philosophy is an improper  explanation
of  the  scriptures;  indeed,  it  is   veiled   Buddhism.”   Sankaracarya’s
propagation of Mayavada philosophy was planned  by  his  Lord,  the  Supreme
Personality  of  Godhead,  who  recognized  that  until  conditioned   souls
regained access to the Vedas’ spiritual knowledge they could only  speculate
about transcendent reality and would have no hope of  being  delivered  from
the material world.
   Once Advaita Vedanta had replaced Buddhism and faith  in  the  Vedas  had
been re-established, people could be  brought  further  along  the  path  of
knowledge to an appreciation for the glories of the Personality of  Godhead.
This would be accomplished by  counteracting  the  appeal  of  impersonalism
with  true  Vaisnava  philosophy.  Thus  stalwart  Vaisnava   acaryas   like
Ramanujacarya, Madhvacarya, and Sridhara Svami came  one  after  another  to
drive out impersonalism. In its place they re-established the principles  of
pure devotional service as the true spirit and intent of the Vedas  and  its
corollary  scriptures.   For   his   part,   Sridhara   Svami   helped   the
impersonalists get a taste for Srimad-Bhagavatam by writing a
   COMMENTARY  that also appealed to them.
   Still later, the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself came in the  garb
of a devotee, as Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu, and went  even  further.  He
taught that even more advanced than vaidhi-bhakti,  the  path  of  regulated
devotional service, is raga-bhakti, the path of spontaneous loving  devotion
to  Krsna,  which  one  can  traverse  by  following  in  the  footsteps  of
Vrndavana’s residents. He  also  taught  that  this  raga-bhakti,  which  is
elaborately explained in  the  Tenth  Canto  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  is  the
ultimate expression of prema, love of God. Since Caitanya Mahaprabhu is  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can contest His siddhanta?  Rather,  the
gradual progression from voidism to monism  to  personalism  to  raga-bhakti
was all the Lord’s plan for mercifully  saving  the  conditioned  souls,  an
arrangement by which they could end the otherwise  endless  cycle  of  birth
and death. Without a doubt, therefore, the Lord was not  acting  cruelly  or
capriciously when He instructed Lord Siva to appear as  Sankara  and  spread
the false doctrine of  the  individual  soul’s  absolute  oneness  with  the
Supreme. To the contrary, He did so out of His limitless mercy.
   In later Texts, Srila Jiva Gosvami will point  out  many  inconsistencies
between Sankara’s teachings and the actual conclusion of the Vedas.  In  the
next
   TEXT he shows us the glories of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  that  the  Bhagavatam
itself reveals .


                              TATTVA SANDARBHA


                            BY SRILA JIVA GOSWAMI


                                  [PART 5]


===== TS.24 =====
NUMBER: 24
SOURCE LABEL: Text 24

TEXT 24.1
   yad eva kila drstva saksat tac-chisyatam  praptair  api  Sri-madhvacarya-
caranair   vaisnava-mate    pravisya    vaisnavantaranam    tac-chisyantara-
punyaranyadi-ritika-vyakhya-pravesa-sankaya tatra tatparyantaram  likhadbhir
vartmopadesa krta iti ca satvata varnayanti.
   Devotees of Lord  Visnu  recount  that  although  Sri  Madhvacarya-carana
belonged to the direct disciplic line  of  Sankaracarya,  upon  reading  the
Bhagavatam Madhvacarya changed his allegiance to the Vaisnava school.  Then,
concerned that other Vaisnavas might be influenced by  the  commentaries  of
other disciplic descendants of Sankara, such as the
   COMMENTARY  by Punyaranya, Sri Madhvacarya wrote Bhagavata-tatparyaya,  a
gloss on Srimad-Bhagavatam that showed the proper method of interpretation.


   TEXT 24.2
   tasmad yuktam uktam tatraiva prathama-skandhe
   tad idam grahayam asa sutam atma-vatam varam
   sarva-vedetihasanam saram saram samuddhrtam
   @VCONTINUE = dvadase
   sarva-vedanta-saram hi Sri-bhagavatam isyate
   tad-rasamrta-trptasya nanyatra syad ratih kvacit
   For all  these  reasons,  therefore,  the  following  statements  in  the
Bhagavatam are appropriate. In the First Canto [1.3.41]:
   “After extracting the cream of all the Vedas and Itihasas, Sri  Vyasadeva
imparted this Srimad-Bhagavatam to his son Sukadeva, the best of  the  self-
realized souls.”
   In the Twelfth Canto [12.13.15]:
   “Srimad-Bhagavatam  is  declared  to  be  the  essence  of  all   Vedanta
philosophy. One who has felt satisfaction from  its  nectarean  mellow  will
never be attracted to any other literature.”


   TEXT 24.3
   tatha prathame
   @VL1 = nigama-kalpa-taror galitam phalam
   @VL2 = suka-mukhad amrta-drava-samyutam
   @VL1 = pibata bhagavatam rasam a-layam
   @VL2 = muhur aho rasika bhuvi bhavukah
   @VCONTINUE = ata eva tatraiva
   @VL1 = yah svanubhavam akhila-sruti-saram ekam
   @VL2 = adhyatma-dipam atititirsatam tamo ’ndham
   @VL1 = samsarinam karunayaha purana-guhyam
   @VL2 = tam vyasa-sunum upayami gurum muninam
   @VCONTINUE = iti Sri-bhagavata-matam tu  sarva-matanam  adhisa-rupam  iti
sucakam. sarva-muninam sabha-madhyam  adhyasya  upadestrtvena  tesam  sarva-
muninam gurutvam api tasya tatra su-vyaktam.
   And in the First Canto [1.1.3]:
   “O expert and thoughtful men on the earth, relish Srimad-Bhagavatam,  the
mature fruit of the desire tree of Vedic literature, up  to  liberation  and
beyond. It emanated from the lips of Sri Sukadeva  Gosvami.  Therefore  this
fruit has become even  more  tasteful,  although  its  nectarean  juice  was
already relishable for all, including liberated souls.”
   Thus in the same canto [1.2.3]:
   “Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto him [Sukadeva], the spiritual
master of all sages, the son of Vyasadeva, who, out of his great  compassion
for those gross materialists who struggle to cross over the darkest  regions
of material existence, spoke this most confidential supplement to the  cream
of all Vedic knowledge, the transcendental torchlight of  Srimad-Bhagavatam,
after having personally assimilated it by experience.”
   These verses imply that the teachings of Srimad-Bhagavatam rule over  all
other philosophies. They also clearly indicate that Sri Sukadeva, by  taking
the  speaker’s  seat  amidst  the  assembled  sages  as   the   Bhagavatam’s
preceptor, became the guru of everyone present.


   COMMENTARY
   Srimad-Bhagavatam Is the Topmost Vedic Scripture
   Here Srila Jiva Gosvami explains Madhvacarya’s reason for  commenting  on
Srimad-Bhagavatam.  Sankaracarya  wrote  poems   glorifying   Lord   Krsna’s
pastimes as  told  in  the  Bhagavatam,  but  some  of  his  followers,  not
understanding his true intention, took this as a license to try  to  include
the Bhagavatam as part of the Mayavada canon.  Of  those  who  tried  to  do
this, a few wrote commentaries on the  Bhagavatam  and  somehow  managed  to
screw out an impersonal interpretation. One such
   COMMENTARY  was Punyaranya’s,  which  is  now  lost.  Srila  Madhvacarya,
wanting to protect  Vaisnavas  from  being  misled,  wrote  a  gloss  called
Bhagavata-tatparya.
   Since Jiva Gosvami  has  already  shown  that  Srimad-Bhagavatam  is  the
topmost pramana, he  can  now  cite  it  directly  to  demonstrate  its  own
stature. Such citations will only increase a sincere reader’s faith  in  the
Bhagavatam, and so from this point on  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  relies  on  the
Bhagavatam itself as the principal source for his  analysis.  Here  he  also
reveals the eminence Srimad-Bhagavatam enjoys by virtue  of  the  status  of
its brilliant speaker, Sukadeva Gosvami. Vyasadeva taught the Bhagavatam  to
Sukadeva,  his  most  brilliant  student,  and  Sukadeva  chose   to   study
Bhagavatam because it is the most brilliant of books.
   Although Srila Vyasadeva had many disciples, He gave the Bhagavatam  only
to Sukadeva. Vyasa did this not because He was partial toward  his  son  but
because Sukadeva was atma-vatam varam, “the best of the  self-realized.”  In
other words, Sukadeva had no ulterior, material motives,  and  therefore  he
could understand the true purport of the  Bhagavatam,  the  essence  of  the
Vedas, Vedanta, and Itihasas.
   The most important part of a tree is  its  sweet,  juicy  fruit,  and  so
Srimad-Bhagavatam has been compared to the succulent fruit of  the  tree  of
Vedic literature.  And  this  Bhagavatam  fruit  is  even  more  exceptional
because it has no skin or pit. In other words, there is nothing  to  discard
in the Bhagavatam. In this
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami quotes two verses from the Bhagavatam, 1.1.3  and
1.2.3, to show its importance for  both  liberated  and  conditioned  souls.
Because Sukadeva was completely free of selfish motives, he  fully  realized
the Bhagavatam’s significance and so  was  elected  to  speak,  even  in  an
assembly of learned sages that included his guru and his  guru’s  guru.  The
choice of Sukadeva as speaker implies that his qualifications  for  reciting
Srimad-Bhagavatam made him superior to all the other assembled  sages.  This
is one more indication that Srimad-Bhagavatam is the foremost of  scriptures
and that it alone should be  analyzed  to  know  sambandha,  abhidheya,  and
prayojana.
   Next Srila Jiva Gosvami shows the importance of the speaker, Sri Sukadeva
Gosvami.


===== TS.25 =====
NUMBER: 25
SOURCE LABEL: Text 25

TEXT 25.1
   yatah
   @VL1 = tatropajagmur bhuvanam punana
   @VL2 = mahanubhava munayah sa-sisyah
   @VL1 = prayena tirthabhigamapadesaih
   @VL2 = svayam hi tirthani punanti santah
   p@VL1 = atrir vasisthas cyavanah saradvan
   @VL2 = aristanemir bhrgur angiras ca
   @VL1 = parasaro gadhi-suto ’tha rama
   @VL2 = utathya indrapramadedhmavahau
   p@VL1 = medhatithir devala arstiseno
   @VL2 = bharadvajo gautamah pippaladah
   @VL1 = maitreya aurvah kavasah kumbha-yonir
   @VL2 = dvaipayano bhagavan naradas ca
   p@VL1 = anye ca devarsi-brahmarsi-varya
   @VL2 = rajarsi-varya arunadayas ca
   @VL1 = nanarseya-pravarams tan sametan
   @VL2 = abhyarcya raja sirasa vavande
   p@VL1 = sukhopavistesv atha tesu bhuyah
   @VL2 = krta-pranamah sva-cikirsitam yat
   @VL1 = vijïapayam asa vivikta-ceta
   @VL2 = upasthito ’gre nigrhita-panih
   @VCONTINUE = ity-ady-anantaram
   @VL1 = tatas ca vah prcchyam idam viprcche
   @VL2 = visrabhya vipra iti-krtyatayam
   @VL1 = sarvatmana mriyamanais ca krtyam
   @VL2 = suddham ca tatramrsatabhiyuktah
   @VCONTINUE = iti prcchati rajïi
   @VL1 = tatrabhavad bhagavan vyasa-putro
   @VL2 = yadrcchaya gam atamano ’napeksah
   @VL1 = alaksya-lingo nija-labha-tusto
   @VL2 = vrtas ca balair avadhuta-vesah
   Thus it is said [in Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.19.8–12]:
   “At that  time  all  the  great-minded  thinkers,  accompanied  by  their
disciples, arrived there. On the plea of making a  pilgrim’s  journey,  such
sages verily sanctify a place of pilgrimage just  by  their  presence.  From
different parts of  the  universe  there  arrived  great  sages  like  Atri,
Cyavana,  Saradvan,  Aristanemi,  Bhrgu,  Vasistha,  Parasara,   Visvamitra,
Angira, Parasurama, Utathya, Indrapramada,  Idhmabahu,  Medhatithi,  Devala,
Arstisena,  Bharadvaja,  Gautama,  Pippalada,   Maitreya,   Aurva,   Kavasa,
Kumbhayoni, Dvaipayana, and the great personality Narada.  There  were  also
many  other  saintly  demigods,  kings,  and  special  royal  orders  called
arunadayas [a special rank of rajarsis] from different dynasties  of  sages.
When they all assembled to meet the emperor  [Pariksit],  he  received  them
properly and bowed his head to the ground. After all  the  rsis  and  others
had seated themselves comfortably, the king,  humbly  standing  before  them
with folded hands, told them of his decision to fast until death.”
   Then the king said:
   “O trustworthy brahmanas, I now ask you about my immediate duty.  Please,
after proper deliberation, tell me of the unalloyed duty of everyone in  all
circumstances, and specifically of those who are just about to  die”  [Bhag.
1.19.24].
   Then, after the king’s query:
   “At that moment  there  appeared  the  powerful  son  of  Vyasadeva,  who
traveled over the earth indifferent and satisfied  within  himself.  He  did
not manifest any symptoms of belonging to any  social  order  or  status  of
life. He was surrounded by women and children, and he dressed as  if  others
had neglected him” [Bhag. 1.19.25].


   TEXT 25.2
   tatas ca `pratyutthitas te munayah svasanebhyah' ity-ady-ante
   @VL1 = sa samvrtas tatra mahan mahiyasam
   @VL2 = brahmarsi-rajarsi-surarsi-varyaih
   @VL1 = vyarocatalam bhagavan yathendur
   @VL2 = graharksa-tara-nikaraih paritah
   @VCONTINUE = ity uktam.
   Then “the sages all rose from their seats to honor him.” And finally:
   “Sukadeva Gosvami was then surrounded by saintly sages and demigods  just
as the moon is surrounded by stars, planets, and other heavenly bodies.  His
presence was gorgeous, and he was respected by all” [Bhag. 1.19.30].


   COMMENTARY
   Sri Sukadeva Is the Best Scholar of Srimad-Bhagavatam
   After Srngi cursed Maharaja Pariksit, the king renounced his kingdom  and
took a vow to fast until death on the bank  of  the  Ganges.  At  that  time
sages of all classes and orders came from various parts of the universe  and
assembled there.  Among  them  were  even  incarnations  of  the  Lord  like
Parasurama and Vyasadeva. When Pariksit Maharaja inquired  from  them  about
the duties of a human being, especially one who is  about  to  die,  no  one
gave him a definitive answer. At that time the most noble  Sukadeva  Gosvami
arrived, and he was  unanimously  chosen  as  the  right  person  to  answer
Maharaja Pariksit’s query.
   In the previous
   TEXT Jiva Gosvami said that all the sages accepted Sukadeva as  guru.  In
this section Jiva Gosvami cites the references to support his  claim.  Since
the sages accepted Sukadeva as guru and it  was  Srimad-Bhagavatam  that  he
spoke in response to Pariksit Maharaja’s  questions,  we  should  understand
that the Bhagavatam’s philosophy was accepted by all  the  assembled  sages,
who included propagators and followers of various other  philosophies.  Just
as Srila Sukadeva Gosvami shone like an effulgent moon  among  the  starlike
sages, Srimad-Bhagavatam shines in the same way among all other scriptures.
   Next  Srila  Jiva   Gosvami   shows   that   Srimad-Bhagavatam   is   the
representative of Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.


===== TS.26 =====
NUMBER: 26
SOURCE LABEL: Text 26

TEXT 26.1
   atra yady api tatra Sri-vyasa-naradau  tasyapi  guru-parama-guru  tathapi
punas tan-mukha-nihsrtam Sri-bhagavatam tayor  apy  asruta-caram  iva  jatam
ity evam Sri-sukas tav apy upadidesa desyam ity abhiprayah. yad uktam `suka-
mukhad  amrta-drava-samyutam'  iti.  tasmad  evam  api   Sri-bhagavatasyaiva
sarvadhikyam. matsyadinam yat puranadhikyam sruyate tat  tv  apeksikam  iti.
aho kim bahuna Sri-krsna-pratinidhi-rupam evedam.
   Sri Vyasadeva and Narada Muni were present  in  that  assembly.  Although
these two sages were Sri Suka’s  guru  and  grand-guru,  respectively,  when
they heard Srimad-Bhagavatam issuing from his lips, they  felt  as  if  they
had never heard it before. For this reason it is said here  that  he  taught
this most significant wisdom even  to  them.  As  mentioned  earlier,  suka-
mukhad amrta-drava-samyutam: “The  Bhagavatam  is  enriched  with  nectarean
juice from the mouth of Suka” [Bhag. 1.1.3]. Thus in this sense also Srimad-
Bhagavatam is more glorious than any other scripture. Statements  about  the
superiority  of  other  Puranas,  such  as  the  Matsya  Purana,  are   only
relatively true. What more need be said! Indeed,  Srimad-Bhagavatam  is  the
very representation of Lord Krsna.


   TEXT 26.2
   yata uktam prathama-skandhe
   krsne sva-dhamopagate dharma-jïanadibhih saha
   kalau nasta-drsam esa puranarko ’dhunoditah
   @VCONTINUE = iti. ata eva sarva-guna-yuktatvam  asyaiva  drstam  `dharmah
projjhita-kaitavo ’tra' ity-adina,
   vedah puranam kavyam ca prabhur mitram priyeva ca
   bodhayantiti hi prahus tri-vrd bhagavatam punah
   @VCONTINUE = iti mukta-phale hemadri-kara-vacanena ca.
   As the First Canto states:
   “This Srimad-Bhagavatam is as brilliant as the sun,  and  it  has  arisen
just after the departure of Lord Krsna to  His  own  abode,  accompanied  by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost  their  vision  due  to  the
dense darkness of ignorance in the Age of Kali shall  get  light  from  this
Purana” [Bhag. 1.3.43].
   In this way we can see that  only  Srimad-Bhagavatam  is  full  with  all
virtues, as stated in the  second  verse  of  the  First  Canto:  “Here  the
supreme religion is explained and all cheating propensities are rejected.”
   The supremacy of the Bhagavatam is also confirmed by the  words  of  both
Vopadeva (in his Mukta-phala) and Hemadri:
   “The Vedas, Puranas, and poetic works instruct one like a master, friend,
or beloved, respectively, but Srimad-Bhagavatam instructs like all three.”


   TEXT 26.3
   tasman manyantam va kecit puranantaresu vedasya sapeksatvam Sri-bhagavate
tu tatha sambhavana svayam eva nirastety api  svayam  eva  labdham  bhavati.
ata eva parama-sruti-rupatvam tasya. yathoktam
   katham va pandaveyasya rajarser munina saha
   samvadah samabhut tata yatraisa satvati srutih
   @VCONTINUE = iti. atha yat khalu sarvam purana-jatam  avirbhavyety-adikam
purvam  uktam  tat  tu   prathama-skandha-gata-Sri-vyasa-narada-samvadenaiva
prameyam.
   Consequently, while some may think that other Puranas need the support of
the  Vedas’  authority,  Srimad-Bhagavatam  itself  explicitly  refutes  the
possibility that it may be dependent  in  this  way;  we  thus  receive  the
Bhagavatam on its own authority alone. For this reason it  is  in  fact  the
highest manifestation of sruti [the original Vedas]. As it is said:
   “How did it so happen that King Pariksit met this great sage,  making  it
possible for this Vedic
   TEXT for the pure Vaisnavas (satvati sruti) to be sung  to  him?”  [Bhag.
1.4.7].
   That Srimad-Bhagavatam was compiled after the other Puranas, as mentioned
earlier, is known from the dialogue between Sri Vyasa  and  Narada  Muni  in
the First Canto.


   COMMENTARY
   Srimad-Bhagavatam Is Self-Sufficient
   Vedic tradition recognizes three ways of teaching—like a  ruler,  like  a
friend, and like a lover. The Vedas speak in an imperative  voice,  like  an
overlord: satyam vada dharmam cara.  “Speak  the  truth  and  be  religious”
(Taittiriya Up. 1.11). The Vedas do not need to offer  logical  reasons  for
following their instructions. One is expected to obey without question.  The
Puranas instruct like a friend, narrating  stories  with  moral  conclusions
and  providing  reasoned  explanations  when  required.  Kavya,  or   poetic
literature,  gives  counsel  like  a  beloved  lady,  speaking  sweetly  but
indirectly. Instructions are expressed in an aesthetically pleasing  way  to
attract the reader or hearer. Srimad-Bhagavatam  uses  all  three  of  these
methods to convey its teachings.
   Just as a phrase  or  song  becomes  more  significant  when  an  eminent
personality  quotes  or  sings  it,  so  the  Bhagavatam  has  increased  in
significance because the eminent Sukadeva Gosvami recited  it.  He  narrated
the Bhagavatam in such a marvelous way that both his guru, Srila  Vyasadeva,
and his param guru, Sri Narada Muni, were amazed. They felt as if  they  had
never heard it before.
   The customary etiquette is that a disciple should neither sit higher than
his  teachers  nor  speak  as  an  authority  in  their  presence.  Sukadeva
Gosvami’s speaking Srimad-Bhagavatam from an elevated seat in  the  presence
of his gurus is one of the rare exceptions. Because his gurus  consented  to
it, however, Sri Suka is faultless, as Srila Visvanatha  Cakravarti  Thakura
points out in his
   COMMENTARY  on Bhagavatam 1.17.29, which describes Suka’s  accepting  the
speaker’s seat. From the narrations of the Mahabharata we learn that  Narada
and Vyasa were often  called  upon  to  address  various  audiences  on  the
subjects of karma, yoga, and jïana. They rarely had an opportunity  to  hear
such extraordinarily pure Bhagavata discourse. So they were moved  to  great
ecstasy  when  the  nectarlike  juice  of  topics  concerning  the   Supreme
Personality of Godhead issued from the lips of  Sri  Suka,  their  qualified
disciple.
   Srimad-Bhagavatam’s special greatness is thus  due  to  its  unparalleled
author, its eminent speaker, and its elevated audience. No  other  scripture
in recorded history has ever had  such  an  audience,  except  perhaps  when
Grandfather Bhisma instructed King Yudhisthira from his bed of arrows  after
the  Kuruksetra  War.  Bhisma’s  main  purpose,  however,  was  to  convince
Yudhisthira to begin managing his kingdom.  By  contrast,  Srimad-Bhagavatam
was spoken in just the opposite context:  King  Pariksit,  having  renounced
his kingdom, simply wanted to hear krsna-katha and  in  this  way  discharge
the only duty of a dying man. Sri Sukadeva thus had no need  to  dilute  his
narration  with  talk  of  lower  religious  principles.  Therefore  Srimad-
Bhagavatam is the most perfect and  complete  transcendental  scripture.  It
does not even depend on the support of the Vedas.
   Indeed, the sunlike Srimad-Bhagavatam is the very representation of  Lord
Krsna. The  Lord  possesses  all  good  qualities,  as  Srila  Rupa  Gosvami
explains in his  Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu  (2.1.17)  while  analyzing  various
devotional mellows:
   nayakanam siro-ratnam krsnas tu bhagavan svayam
   yatra nityataya sarve virajante maha-gunah
“Lord Sri Krsna, the original Personality of Godhead, is the crest jewel  of
all heroes. All wonderful qualities are eternally  present  in  Him.”  Since
Srimad-Bhagavatam is nondifferent from Krsna, it is also a reservoir of  all
good qualities.
   When Lord Krsna appeared He  destroyed  many  demons  and  protected  His
saintly devotees.  In  the  same  way,  the  Bhagavata  Purana  uproots  the
demoniac  influence  in  society  and  protects  saintly  persons  with  its
ambrosial narrations. Other  scriptures  speak  about  fruitive  activities,
impersonal Brahman, or yoga, and they may or may  not  say  something  about
the transcendental path of love of Godhead. But  the  Bhagavatam  kicks  out
all types of inferior, cheating religions like refuse. Only explanations  of
the Absolute Reality find a place in its pages.
   Having established Bhagavatam as the supreme pramana, in the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami explains his method of analyzing it.


===== TS.27 =====
NUMBER: 27
SOURCE LABEL: Text 27

TEXT 27.1
   tad     evam     parama-nihsreyasa-niscayaya      Sri-bhagavatam      eva
paurvaparyavirodhena  vicaryate.  tatrasmin   sandarbha-satkatmake   granthe
sutra-sthaniyam avatarika-vakyam visaya-vakyam Sri-bhagavata-vakyam. bhasya-
rupa tad-vyakhya tu samprati  madhya-desadau  vyaptan  advaita-vadino  nunam
bhagavan-mahimanam   avagahayitum   tad-vadena   karvurita-lipinam   parama-
vaisnavanam  Sridhara-svami-carananam  suddha-vaisnava-siddhantanugata   cet
tarhi yathavad eva vilikhyate.
   So it is that we shall focus our attention on studying  Srimad-Bhagavatam
to determine what is the  ultimate  good  in  life.  While  conducting  this
study, we shall take into consideration how  Srimad-Bhagavatam’s  statements
harmonize  with  their  preceding  and  following  texts.   In   these   Six
Sandarbhas, the statements with which we introduce our  explanation  of  the
Bhagavatam  verses  will  serve  as  the  sutras,  the   Bhagavatam   verses
themselves will serve as the scriptural
   TEXT to be analyzed, and the explanations of these verses  given  by  the
great Vaisnava Sridhara Svami will serve as the
   COMMENTARY  on the sutras. Sometimes he inserted Mayavadi ideas into  his
writings to make the glories of the Personality of Godhead  more  attractive
to the minds of the impersonalists, who are now quite prevalent,  especially
in central India. When Sridhara Svami’s
   COMMENTARY  accords with strict Vaisnava principles, we  shall  quote  it
verbatim.


   TEXT 27.2
   kvacit  tesam  evanyatra-drsta-vyakhyanusarena   dravidadi-desa-vikhyata-
parama-bhagavatanam tesam eva bahulyena  tatra  vaisnavatvena  prasiddhatvat
Sri-bhagavata eva
   kvacit kvacin maha-raja dravidesu ca bhurisah
   @VCONTINUE = ity anena pramita-mahimnam saksac-chri-prabhrtitah pravrtta-
sampradayanam Sri-vaisnavabhidhanam Sri-ramanuja-bhagavat-pada-viracita-Sri-
bhasyadi-drsta-mata-pramanyena mula-grantha-svarasyena canyatha ca. advaita-
vyakhyanam tu prasiddhatvan nativitayate.
   Sometimes we shall follow the  views  Sridhara  Svami  has  expressed  in
writings other than his Bhagavatam
   COMMENTARY . In other cases we shall follow the original meaning of the
   TEXT by basing our explanations on  the  authoritative  opinions  of  the
venerable Ramanujacarya  Bhagavatpada,  expressed  in  such  works  as  Sri-
bhasya. He is the renowned leader of the Vaisnavas  of  the  Sri-sampradaya,
which originated directly with Goddess  Laksmi.  These  great  devotees  are
famous throughout India’s  southern  region  (Dravida-desa)  and  elsewhere.
Srimad-Bhagavatam itself states that they are  well  known  as  devotees  of
Visnu in the south:
   “O king, a few Vaisnavas can be seen here and there in this age, but they
can be found in abundance in the Dravida country” [Bhag. 11.5.39].
   Since the principles of Advaita-vada are already well known, we shall not
discuss them at length.


   COMMENTARY
   Methodology of the Sat-sandarbha
   Here  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  explains  his  method  of  analyzing  Srimad-
Bhagavatam. He plans to follow a format similar to the one  Srila  Vyasadeva
uses in the Vedanta-sutra. In the Sandarbhas,  the  introductory  statements
are like  the  sutras  in  the  Vedanta-sutra,  the  statements  of  Srimad-
Bhagavatam constitute the subject to be analyzed, and Srila  Jiva  Gosvami’s
comments on the Bhagavatam’s statements are like the
   COMMENTARY  (bhasya) on the sutras. Jiva Gosvami also indicates that  his
explanations are not his personal opinion or  products  of  his  imagination
but are given strictly according to the opinions of  the  previous  Vaisnava
acaryas, such as Ramanujacarya and Sridhara Svami.
   Although Sridhara Svami accepted the renounced order of life in Sankara’s
sampradaya, which  opposes  the  personalism  of  Krsna  consciousness,  his
commentaries on Srimad-Bhagavatam, the Bhagavad-gita, and the  Visnu  Purana
make it obvious that he was a great  Vaisnava.  He  clearly  states  in  his
commentaries that the Lord’s form, qualities, abode, associates,  and  names
are all transcendental and eternal, and that devotion to the Lord  continues
even after  liberation.  These  key  philosophical  points  are  opposed  to
Advaita monism and reveal Sridhara Svami’s true stance.
   Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also accepted sannyasa  in  Sankara’s  line,  but
from the beginning His teachings refuted the Mayavada  doctrine.  Hence  Sri
Caitanya’s great respect for Sridhara Svami and his Bhagavatam
   COMMENTARY  is proof enough  that  Sridhara  Svami  was  not  a  Mayavada
sannyasi at heart, any more  than  Sri  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu  was.  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu considered all Mayavadis offenders at the lotus  feet  of  Krsna,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet he would not tolerate even  mild  or
indirect criticism of Srila Sridhara Svami. When Vallabha Bhatta  told  Lord
Caitanya he had written a Bhagavatam
   COMMENTARY   that  surpassed  Sridhara  Svami’s,  Lord  Caitanya  rebuked
Vallabha and refused to hear it  (see  Caitanya-caritamrta,  Antya  113–37).
From this incident we can understand the exalted status  of  Sridhara  Svami
as a surrendered, pure devotee of the Lord. We  can  also  be  certain  that
Jiva Gosvami, as a loyal follower of Lord Caitanya’s, held Sridhara  Svami’s
Bhagavatam
   COMMENTARY , Bhavartha-dipika, in high esteem. Thus  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami
refers to Sridhara as parama-vaisnava, a topmost devotee.
   In this
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami tells why Sridhara Svami inserted  some  Mayavadi
ideas into his Bhavartha-dipika
   COMMENTARY . Some of Sankara’s followers developed a  taste  for  Srimad-
Bhagavatam after reading his devotional poems based on the  Bhagavatam,  but
these followers  still  maintained  their  overall  impersonal  outlook.  To
attract these sannyasis toward the path of devotion, Sridhara Svami wrote  a
mixed
   COMMENTARY  on the spotless Purana. Just as  a  fisherman  uses  bait  to
catch fish, occasionally Sridhara  Svami  would  present  monistic  opinions
about some Bhagavatam verses in order to attract the Mayavadis who liked  to
read the Bhagavatam. This was merely part  of  his  preaching  strategy;  it
doesn’t make him a Mayavadi.
   Nevertheless, although Jiva Gosvami understands Sridhara Svami’s motives,
in the Sandarbhas he chooses not to cite the impersonal  explanations  found
in the Bhavartha-dipika. In  fact,  throughout  the  Sandarbhas  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami takes every opportunity to demolish the Mayavada  view.  Clearly  he
does not consider the Mayavadis his  primary  audience,  as  Sridhara  Svami
must have when he wrote his
   COMMENTARY . Jiva  Gosvami’s  intended  audience  is  apparent  from  his
declaration in the sixth
   TEXT of the Tattva-sandarbha, where he says that no one should read  this
book who is averse to serving Lord Krsna’s lotus feet.
   Jiva Gosvami’s intended audience comprises those who are already  on  the
path of Krsna  consciousness  or  at  least  interested  in  taking  to  it.
Naturally, therefore, he says here that he will quote from Sridhara  Svami’s

   COMMENTARY  only when it accords with strict  Vaisnava  principles.  This
statement has caused some modern scholars to criticize Jiva Gosvami for  not
respecting the liberal sentiments  of  Sri  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu,  but  this
criticism arises from a superficial understanding of  Lord  Caitanya’s  real
attitude.
   Sridhara Svami was not a Mayavadi,  although  for  the  reason  mentioned
above he did give a monistic slant to some parts of his Bhagavatam
   COMMENTARY . Considering why Sridhara Svami did this  in  his  Bhavartha-
dipika, why should Srila Jiva Gosvami, in an entirely different  work  meant
for an entirely different audience, cite those  explanations  of  Sridhara’s
that oppose the true conclusion of the Bhagavatam and even Sridhara  Svami’s
own convictions? Sri Jiva has already established Srimad-Bhagavatam  as  the
supreme authority, and from this point on in  his  Sandarbhas  he  will  not
deal with any opinions that contradict it. He makes his policy explicit:  He
respects the purports of Sridhara insofar as  they  follow  the  spirit  and
intent of Srimad-Bhagavatam itself. In this way Srila Jiva  Gosvami  remains
true to the Vaisnavism of Srila Sridhara Svami and also to his own  Gaudiya-
sampradaya.
   At the end of this Text, when Jiva  Gosvami  says  he  is  not  going  to
describe the details of the  Advaita  monistic  doctrine  because  they  are
already  well  known,  he  implies  that  Mayavada,  though  popular,   only
apparently explains the meaning of the  sastras  and  is  not  really  worth
discussing, and he also implies that he intends to refute it.
   Next Srila Jiva Gosvami describes the  sources  of  evidence  other  than
Srimad-Bhagavatam that he plans to cite in the Sat-sandarbha.


===== TS.28 =====
NUMBER: 28
SOURCE LABEL: Text 28

TEXT 28.1
   atra ca sva-darsitartha-visesa-pramanyayaiva na tu Srimad-bhagavata-vakya-
pramanyaya pramanani sruti-puranadi-vacanani  yatha-drstam  evodaharaniyani.
kvacit svayam  adrstakarani  ca  tattva-vada-gurunam  anadhunikanam  Srimac-
chankaracarya-sisyatam labdhvapi  Sri-bhagavat-paksa-patena  tato  vicchidya
pracura-pracarita-vaisnava-mata-visesanam           daksinadi-desa-vikhyata-
sisyopasisyi-bhuta-Sri-vijayadhvaja-brahmatirtha-vyasatirthadi-veda-
vedartha-vidvad-varanam  Sri-madhvacarya-carananam   Sri-bhagavata-tatparya-
bharata-tatparya-brahma-sutra-bhasyadibhyah sangrhitani.
   Here in the Sat-sandarbha I will quote from the Vedas, Puranas, and other
such scriptures, just as I have seen them. I will quote  these  passages  to
verify my own interpretations,  not  the  statements  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam.
Some of the verses quoted here I have not seen in their original  texts  but
have gleaned from citations  in  the  Bhagavata-tatparya,  Bharata-tatparya,
Brahma-sutra-bhasya, and other  works  by  the  venerable  Madhvacarya,  the
prolific preacher  of  the  distinct  Vaisnava  philosophy  of  Tattva-vada.
Although coming originally in the disciplic line of Sriman Sankaracarya,  he
became an adherent  of  Vaisnavism  and  severed  his  connection  with  the
Advaitins. In his line have appeared such disciples and  grand-disciples  as
Vijayadhvaja Tirtha, Brahma Tirtha and Vyasa  Tirtha;  very  famous  in  the
south, they are most eminent  scholars  of  the  Vedic  literature  and  its
interpretation.


   TEXT 28.2
   tais caivam uktam bharata-tatparye
   sastrantarani saïjanan vedantasya prasadatah
   dese dese tatha granthan drstva caiva prthag-vidhan
   pyatha sa bhagavan vyasah saksan narayanah prabhuh
   jagada bharatadyesu tatha vaksye tad-iksaya
   @VCONTINUE = iti. tatra tad-uddhrta srutis catur-veda-sikhadya puranam ca
garudadinam  samprati  sarvatrapracarad-rupam  amsadikam  samhita  ca  maha-
samhitadika tantram ca tantra-bhagavatadikam brahma-tarkadikam iti jïeyam.
   In his Bharata-tatparya Sri Madhvacarya states:
   “Having understood other scriptures with the help of  the  Vedanta-sutra,
and having looked at various kinds of scriptures in different parts  of  the
country, I shall give my explanation in accordance with what Sri  Vyasadeva,
who is none other  than  the  Supreme  Lord  Narayana,  has  spoken  in  His
Mahabharata and other works. In this description I will carefully adhere  to
His viewpoint” [Bharata-tatparyya 2.7.8].[4]
   The texts we will cite from the works of  Sri  Madhvacarya  will  include
portions from such Vedic srutis as the Catur-veda-sikha, Puranic texts  from
unavailable parts of the Garuda Purana and other works, samhita  texts  from
the Maha-samhita and similar  works,  and  tantra  texts  from  the  Tantra-
bhagavatam, Brahma-tarka, and so on.


   COMMENTARY
   The Source of References
   Since Srila Jiva Gosvami has proven Srimad-Bhagavatam to be  the  supreme
pramana, it needs no further validation. Therefore,  as  he  mentions  here,
from this point onward he will quote  scripture  only  to  support  his  own
interpretations, not the Bhagavatam’s statements. He will  cite  sources  he
has read in  his  own  library  and  elsewhere,  and  he  will  also  borrow
references from the writings of Sri Madhvacarya, who lived a  few  centuries
before Jiva. Madhvacarya often quotes from books that  by  Sri  Jiva’s  time
had already been lost.
   In Madhvacarya’s time (the twelfth century A.D.) there were  no  printing
presses. Madhvacarya traveled the length and  breadth  of  India  collecting
scriptures and philosophical books and copying them by hand at  the  various
temples and libraries he visited.  He  was  renowned  for  his  photographic
memory, so when he was not allowed to copy the books he found, he read  them
and later reproduced them from memory. In this way  he  amassed  an  immense
library at his headquarters in Udupi, in Karnataka.  Some  say  his  library
had no equal. Unfortunately, it was destroyed  by  fire,  and  many  of  the
books he refers to in his writings were lost forever. In several  places  in
the Sandarbhas Srila Jiva Gosvami has to make do with  the  references  from
lost works cited by Madhvacarya in his books.
   Madhvacarya’s  Tattva-vada  is  by   definition   the   philosophy   that
“everything is real”: sarvam vastu  satyam  iti  tattva-vadah.  The  Advaita
monists say that only  Brahman  is  real  and  that  everything  else  is  a
manifestation of Maya. Madhvacarya soundly defeated the Mayavada  philosophy
with his Tattva-vada, both in his writings and in public  debates  with  the
leading Mayavadis of his time.
   By relying on books by Srila Madhvacarya and his eminent followers  as  a
principal source of evidence, Jiva Gosvami shows his indebtedness  to  them.
Jiva Gosvami is, however, a  follower  of  Lord  Caitanya,  whose  teachings
differ from Madhvacarya’s. In his Sandarbhas Sri Jiva  plans  to  draw  from
those ideas of Madhvacarya that agree with Lord Krsna Caitanya  Mahaprabhu’s
Acintya-bhedabheda  philosophy.  When  examined  impartially,  the  Acintya-
bhedabheda philosophy proves the best and most comprehensive explanation  of
Vedic knowledge. It is the perfect synthesis of  all  the  Vedic  literature
because its creator, Sri Caitanya, is the Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.
When the Supreme Lord creates  a  philosophy,  it  naturally  surpasses  all
other systems of thought.
   Here the pramana section of Sri Tattva-sandarbha ends. Having established
sabda-pramana as the  only  independently  valid  means  of  knowledge,  and
having established Srimad-Bhagavatam as the topmost form  of  sabda-pramana,
in the next section Srila Jiva Gosvami will  begin  his  discussion  of  the
prameya, or what we come to know by resorting to the topmost pramana.


===== TS.29 =====
NUMBER: 29
SOURCE LABEL: Text 29

TEXT 29.1
   atha namas-kurvann eva tatha-bhutasya Srimad-bhagavatasya tatparyam  tad-
vaktur hrdaya-nistha-paryalocanaya sanksepatas tavan nirdharayati
   @VL1 = sva-sukha-nibhrta-cetas tad-vyudastanya-bhavo
   @VL2 = ’py ajita-rucira-lilakrsta-saras tadiyam
   @VL1 = vyatanuta krpaya yas tattva-dipam puranam
   @VL2PLUS = tam akhila-vrjina-ghnam vyasa-sunum nato ’smi
   Such being  the  status  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  Suta  Gosvami  concisely
defines its basic message by turning our attention  to  the  disposition  of
the heart of its speaker while offering him obeisances:
   “Let  me  offer  my  respectful  obeisances  unto  Sukadeva  Gosvami,  my
spiritual  master,  the  son  of  Vyasadeva.  It  is  he  who  defeats   all
inauspicious things within this universe. Although in the beginning  he  was
absorbed in the happiness of Brahman realization, giving up all other  types
of consciousness, he  became  attracted  by  the  pleasing,  most  melodious
pastimes of Lord Ajita. He therefore mercifully spoke this  supreme  Purana,
Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is the bright  light  of  the  Absolute  Truth  and
which describes the activities of the Lord” [Bhag. 12.12.69].


   TEXT 29.2
   tika ca Sridhara-svami-viracita `Sri-gurum  namas-karoti.  sva-sukhenaiva
nibhrtam purnam ceto yasya sah.  tenaiva  vyudasto  ’nyasmin  bhavo  bhavana
yasya tatha-bhuto ’py ajitasya rucirabhir lilabhir akrstah sarah  sva-sukha-
gatam dhairyam yasya sah. tattva-dipam paramartha-prakasakam  Sri-bhagavatam
yo vyatanuta tam nato ’smi’ ity esa.
   Sridhara Svami explains in his
   COMMENTARY :
   “Suta Gosvami pays obeisances to his spiritual master [Sri  Suka],  whose
mind was filled only with the bliss of the self and who had thus  put  aside
all other thoughts. But even at that elevated stage his mind  was  drawn  to
the enchanting pastimes of Lord Ajita, and this  attraction  caused  him  to
abandon his sober attachment to impersonal  bliss.  I  offer  my  obeisances
unto him, the speaker of  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  which  illumines  the  supreme
goal of life.”


   TEXT 29.3
   evam eva dvitiye tad-vakyam eva  `prayena  munayo  rajan'  ity-adi-padya-
trayam anusandheyam. atrakhila-vrjinam tadrsa-bhavasya  pratikulam  udasinam
ca sarvam jïeyam. tad evam iha sambandhi-tattvam brahmanandad  api  prakrsto
rucira-lila-visistah Sriman ajita eva.  sa  ca  purnatvena  mukhyataya  Sri-
krsna-samjïa   eveti   Sri-badarayana-samadhau   vyakti-bhavisyati.    tatha
prayojanakhyah  purusarthas  ca  tadrsa-tad-asakti-janakam  tat-prema-sukham
eva.  tato  ’bhidheyam  api   tadrsa-tat-prema-janakam   tal-lila-sravanadi-
laksanam  tad-bhajanam  evety   ayatam.   atra   vyasa-sunum   iti   brahma-
vaivartanusarena  Sri-krsna-varaj   janmata   eva   mayaya   tasyasprstatvam
sucitam. Sri-sutah Sri-saunakam.
   Similarly worth examining are the three verses Sri  Suka  speaks  in  the
Second Canto that begin with the verse whose first line  is  prayena  munayo
rajan [Bhag. 2.1.7–9]. In the verse under  discussion  [Bhag.  12.12.69]  we
should understand that the words akhila-vrjinam (“all inauspicious  things”)
indicate everything contrary or irrelevant to devotional service.
   Therefore the subject of this book (sambandhi-tattva)  is  Sriman  Ajita,
who transcends the ecstasy of impersonal realization  and  is  distinguished
by His enchanting pleasure pastimes. Later, in the con
   TEXT of our discussion of Srila Vyasa’s trance, it  will  be  made  clear
that in His fullest manifestation Lord Ajita is primarily named Sri Krsna.
   Similarly, the final goal (prayojana-tattva) is the happiness of love for
Him,  which  leads  to  the  sort  of  attachment  to  Him  that  Sri   Suka
experienced.  And  thus  our  means   (abhidheya)   is   service   to   Him,
characterized by such devotional processes as hearing His  divine  pastimes,
an activity that generates love for Him, as it did in the case of Sri  Suka.
The identity of each of these three principles  (sambandha,  abhidheya,  and
prayojana) follows as a natural logical consequence.
   The  phrase  vyasa-sunum  (“son  of  Sri  Vyasa”)  [in  Srimad-Bhagavatam
12.12.69]  alludes   to   something   described   in   the   Brahma-vaivarta
Purana—namely, that Sukadeva, because of Sri Krsna’s  benediction,  remained
untouched by Maya from his very birth.
   The verse under discussion [Bhag. 12.12.69] was spoken by Sri Suta to Sri
Saunaka.




   COMMENTARY
   Sri Sukadeva Gosvami’s Faith
   In the preceding Texts, Srila Jiva Gosvami compared  and  contrasted  the
Vedas, Vedanta, Itihasas, and Puranas to show that Srimad-Bhagavatam is  the
topmost pramana for all time. Now, at the commencement of  his  analysis  of
the Bhagavatam itself, he again performs  mangalacarana  to  further  invoke
auspiciousness for his sacred  undertaking  of  writing  the  Sat-sandarbha.
Once again he uses a Bhagavatam verse as his  invocation.  By  quoting  from
Suta Gosvami’s prayers to  Sukadeva,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  himself  reveres
Sukadeva Gosvami to invoke his blessings,  so  that  Jiva  may  present  the
purport of Srimad-Bhagavatam without any deviation. Then he points  out  the
tattvas of sambandha, abhidheya, and prayojana in the quoted verse.
   Unlike commentators who twist  the  Bhagavatam’s  statements  to  support
their own ideas, Srila Jiva Gosvami has no interest in forcing  any  private
opinions on us. He wants to explain Srimad-Bhagavatam as it is. To this  end
he uses a flawless technique, one that leaves us no room  for  doubting  the
correctness of his conclusions. First he has us consider the  heart  of  the
original writer, Srila Vyasadeva, and  also  the  hearts  of  the  speakers,
Sukadeva Gosvami and Suta Gosvami. Then he analyzes the
   TEXT of the Bhagavatam in light  of  that  examination,  incontrovertibly
establishing the purpose of this topmost pramana.
   In the verse quoted from Srimad-Bhagavatam in
   TEXT 29.1, Suta Gosvami reveals something  about  the  life  of  Sukadeva
Gosvami, describing how he became enchanted by the pastimes  of  Krsna  even
while absorbed in the bliss of Brahman. Suta’s purpose is to show  the  firm
conviction  Sukadeva  had  in  Srimad-Bhagavatam  when  he  narrated  it  to
Pariksit Maharaja. Sukadeva  was  self-realized  even  while  in  the  womb.
Indeed, he was so absorbed in the bliss of Brahman that he  wanted  to  stay
there to avoid being attacked by Maya. He  left  the  womb  only  when  Lord
Krsna personally assured him that Maya would not capture  him.  (Srila  Jiva
Gosvami informs us that this description is  found  in  the  Brahma-vaivarta
Purana.) As we learn from Chapter Seven of Srimad-Bhagavatam’s  First  Canto
and from the texts that Srila Jiva Gosvami will  quote  below,  as  soon  as
Sukadeva took birth he left his father’s hermitage for  the  forest.  Later,
when he  heard  a  few  of  Vyasadeva’s  disciples  reciting  some  selected
Bhagavatam verses, his mind became  so  enthralled  that  he  abandoned  his
impersonal meditation on Brahman and began  studying  the  Bhagavatam  under
his great father. Despite all this,  however,  some  Mayavadis  insist  that
because  Srila  Sukadeva  Gosvami  was  attached   to   impersonal   Brahman
realization even before his birth, he  must  have  remained  fixed  in  this
ideal. Therefore, they conclude, Srimad-Bhagavatam in fact promotes  Advaita
impersonalism.  The  prayer  of  Suta  Gosvami  quoted  here  refutes   this
speculation.
   Another reason Srila Jiva Gosvami quotes Suta’s prayer is to  reveal  the
essential   purport   of   Srimad-Bhagavatam:   The   happiness   of   Krsna
consciousness surpasses all other kinds, including that enjoyed  by  merging
into God’s impersonal effulgence.  In  the  Second  Canto  (Bhag.  2.1.7–9),
Sukadeva Gosvami himself confirms the superiority of the bliss of bhakti:
   prayena munayo rajan nivrtta vidhi-sedhatah
   nairgunya-stha ramante sma gunanukathane hareh
   pidam bhagavatam nama puranam brahma-sammitam
   adhitavan dvaparadau pitur dvaipayanad aham
   pparinisthito ’pi nairgunya uttama-sloka-lilaya
   grhita-ceta rajarse akhyanam yad adhitavan
“O King Pariksit, mainly the topmost transcendentalists, who are  above  the
regulative principles and restrictions,  take  pleasure  in  describing  the
glories of the Lord. At the end of the Dvapara-yuga  I  studied  this  great
supplement of Vedic literature named Srimad-Bhagavatam, which  is  equal  to
all the Vedas, from my father, Srila Dvaipayana Vyasadeva. O  saintly  King,
I was certainly  situated  perfectly  in  transcendence,  yet  I  was  still
attracted by the delineation of the pastimes of the Lord, who  is  described
by enlightened verses. Therefore I studied this Purana.”
   This incident from Sukadeva’s life demonstrates the wonderful potency  of
Srimad-Bhagavatam—that it  was  able  to  capture  the  heart  of  a  highly
advanced Brahman-realized soul.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami begins analyzing the heart of Srila Vyasadeva.


===== TS.30 =====
NUMBER: 30
SOURCE LABEL: Text 30

TEXT 30.1
   tadrsam eva tatparyam  karisyamana-tad-grantha-pratipadya-tattva-nirnaya-
krte   tat-pravaktr-Sri-badarayana-krte   samadhav   api   sanksepata    eva
nirdharayati
   bhakti-yogena manasi samyak pranihite ’male
   apasyat purusam purnam mayam ca tad-apasrayam
   pyaya sammohito jiva atmanam tri-gunatmakam
   paro ’pi manute ’nartham tat-krtam cabhipadyate
   panarthopasamam saksad bhakti-yogam adhoksaje
   lokasyajanato vyasas cakre satvata-samhitam
   pyasyam vai sruyamanayam krsne parama-puruse
   bhaktir utpadyate pumsah soka-moha-bhayapaha
   psa samhitam bhagavatim krtvanukramya catmajam
   @V1PLUS = sukam adhyapayam asa nivrtti-niratam munim
   Sri Suta Gosvami elucidates the same basic message  of  Bhagavatam  while
describing the meditative  trance  of  its  author,  Srila  Vyasadeva.  What
Vyasadeva experienced indicates the principles he will  later  establish  in
his book, Srimad-Bhagavatam. Sri Suta describes this trance in brief:
   “Thus he  fixed  his  mind,  perfectly  engaging  it  by  linking  it  in
devotional service [bhakti-yoga] without any tinge of materialism, and  thus
he saw the Absolute Personality of Godhead along with His  external  energy,
which was under full control.  Due  to  this  external  energy,  the  living
entity, although transcendental to  the  three  modes  of  material  nature,
thinks of himself as a material product and thus undergoes the reactions  of
material miseries. The material miseries of the  living  entity,  which  are
superfluous to him, can be directly mitigated  by  the  linking  process  of
devotional service. But the mass of people do not know this,  and  therefore
the learned Vyasadeva composed  this  Vedic  scripture  [Srimad-Bhagavatam],
which is in relation to the Supreme Truth.  Simply  by  one’s  giving  aural
reception to  this  Vedic  scripture,  the  feeling  for  loving  devotional
service to Lord Krsna, the Supreme Personality of  Godhead,  sprouts  up  at
once to extinguish the fire of lamentation, illusion, and  fearfulness.  The
great sage Vyasadeva, after composing  the  Srimad-Bhagavatam  and  revising
it, taught it to His son, Sri Sukadeva Gosvami, who was already  engaged  in
self-realization” [Bhag. 1.7.4–8].


   TEXT 30.2
   tatra
   sa vai nivrtti-niratah sarvatropeksako munih
   kasya va brhatim etam atmaramah samabhyasat
   @VCONTINUE = iti saunaka-prasnanantaram ca
   atmaramas ca munayo nirgrantha apy urukrame
   kurvanty ahaitukim bhaktim ittham-bhuta-guno harih
   pharer gunaksipta-matir bhagavan badarayanih
   adhyagan mahad akhyanam nityam visnu-jana-priyah
   @VCONTINUE = bhakti-yogena premna.
   @VL1 = astv evam anga bhajatam bhagavan mukundo
   @VL2 = muktim dadati karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam
   @VCONTINUE = ity atra prasiddheh.
   Saunaka Rsi then inquires:
   “Sri Sukadeva Gosvami was already on the path  of  self-realization,  and
thus he was pleased with his own self. So why did he  take  the  trouble  to
undergo the study of such a vast literature?” [Bhag. 1.7.9].
   Suta Gosvami replies:
   “All different varieties of atmaramas [those who take pleasure  in  atma,
or  spirit  self],  especially  those  established  on  the  path  of  self-
realization, though freed from all kinds  of  material  bondage,  desire  to
render unalloyed devotional service unto the Personality  of  Godhead.  This
means that the Lord possesses transcendental  qualities  and  therefore  can
attract everyone, including liberated souls.  Srila  Sukadeva  Gosvami,  the
son of Srila Vyasadeva, was not only transcendentally powerful. He was  also
very dear to the devotees of the Lord. Thus,  his  mind  captivated  by  the
enchanting qualities of Lord Hari, he underwent  the  study  of  this  great
narration [Srimad-Bhagavatam]” [Bhag. 1.7.10–11].
   The phrase bhakti-yogena (“through devotional  service,”  [in  Bhagavatam
1.7.4]) means “through love of God,” since the same meaning is  conveyed  in
the following statement:
   “My dear King, the Supreme Personality  of  Godhead,  Mukunda,  sometimes
grants liberation to those who are engaged in  getting  His  favor,  but  He
rarely grants bhakti-yoga, pure love for Him” [Bhag. 5.6.18].


   TEXT 30.3
   pranihite samahite `samadhinanusmara tad-vicestitam' iti tam  prati  Sri-
naradopadesat. purna-padasya mukta-pragrahaya vrttya,
   bhagavan iti sabdo ’yam tatha purusa ity api
   vartate nirupadhis ca vasudeve ’khilatmani
   @VCONTINUE = iti padmottara-khanda-vacanavastambhena. tatha
   kama-kamo yajet somam akamah purusam param
   pakamah sarva-kamo va moksa-kama udara-dhih
   tivrena bhakti-yogena yajeta purusam param
   @VCONTINUE = ity asya vakya-dvayasya  purva-vakye  `purusam  paramatmanam
prakrty-ekopadhim isvaram' uttara-vakye `purusam  purnam  param  nirupadhim'
iti tikanusarena ca purnah puruso ’tra svayam bhagavan evocyate.
   The  word  pranihite  (“fixed”)  means  “concentrated   in   meditation.”
Previously,  Narada  Muni  had  instructed  Vyasadeva  to  “experience   the
pastimes  of  Lord  Krsna  in  trance”  [Bhag.  1.5.13].  The   word   purna
(“complete”) should be understood here in its full, unrestricted  sense,  as
corroborated by the Padma Purana [Uttara-khanda 226.68]:
   “The words bhagavan and purusa, when free from limiting modifiers,  refer
to Lord Vasudeva [Krsna], the Supersoul of all.”
   This is further verified in Sridhara Svami’s
   COMMENTARY  on the following two verses:
   “One who desires sense gratification should worship the moon, but one who
desires nothing of  material  enjoyment  should  worship  the  Supersoul.  A
person who  has  broader  intelligence,  whether  he  be  full  of  material
desires, without any material desires, or desiring liberation, must  by  all
means  worship  the  supreme  whole,  the  Personality  of  Godhead”  [Bhag.
2.3.9–10].
   Srila Sridhara Svami states that the words purusam param in the first  of
these two verses indicates the Supersoul, whose upadhi (apparently  limiting
qualification) is material nature, while the same word in the  second  verse
indicates the  complete  Personality  of  Godhead,  who  is  free  from  all
upadhis. Thus the phrase purna-purusa [in Bhagavatam 1.7.4, quoted in
   TEXT 30.1] refers to the original Personality of Godhead.


   COMMENTARY
   Analysis of Srila Vyasadeva’s Trance, Part I
   To understand the meaning of a profound book like  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  it
is important to understand the author’s  faith  and  experience.  These  two
factors guide his writing, and, as in this case, if the  subsequent  speaker
of the book shares the author’s faith  and  experience,  then  the  author’s
ideas will be accurately conveyed. To understand Srila Vyasadeva’s mind,  or
heart, Srila Jiva Gosvami analyzes Vyasa’s trance, which is  the  source  of
Srimad-Bhagavatam and  reveals  its  essential  ideas.  With  this  analysis
accomplished, Jiva makes it the basis  for  his  explication  of  the  whole
Bhagavatam in his Sat-sandarbha. He has therefore dedicated twenty Texts  of
the Tattva-sandarbha (30–49) just to explore  the  inner  purpose  of  Srila
Vyasadeva’s heart and show how Sukadeva Gosvami’s heart  perfectly  reflects
it.
   In the previous
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami described Sukadeva’s heart even before  beginning
to analyze Srila Vyasadeva’s. Jiva did this to invoke the blessings  of  Sri
Suka, from whom even Srila Vyasadeva was eager to hear the  Bhagavatam.  The
description of Sukadeva in the previous  Text,  moreover,  was  based  on  a
single verse Suta Gosvami spoke in glorification of his guru.  By  contrast,
Vyasadeva’s trance is described  in  six  verses.  It  was  thus  also  more
convenient for Jiva Gosvami to discuss Sukadeva’s mood  before  Vyasadeva’s.
In doing so he follows the  suci-kataha-nyaya,  or  “the  principle  of  the
needle and the kettle,”[5] which  means  that  when  faced  with  a  complex
undertaking one should execute the smaller tasks first.
   In Bhagavatam 1.7.4 (quoted in
   TEXT 30.1) the term bhakti-yogena  means  ”by  prema,  or  pure  love  of
Godhead,” because only in the state of pure love of Godhead can one see  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead along with His potencies. That  bhakti-yogena
means “by prema”  is  confirmed  by  the  word  amala,  meaning  “pure”  and
referring to the condition of Srila Vyasadeva’s heart.
   According to Srila Rupa Gosvami in  his  Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu  (1.2.1),
bhakti is  of  three  varieties:  sa  bhaktih  sadhanam  bhavah  prema  ceti
tridhodita. “Bhakti is  said  to  be  of  three  types—sadhana,  bhava,  and
prema.”  One  who  attains  prema-bhakti  realizes  Krsna  both  within  and
without, and this realization vanquishes both his ignorance about  the  self
and his material miseries.  Srila  Rupa  Gosvami  further  describes  prema-
bhakti as follows: sandrananda-visesatma Sri-krsnakarsini  ca  sa.  “[Prema-
bhakti] is specially characterized by the experience of intense  bliss,  and
it can attract Sri Krsna” (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.1.17).
   Srila Jiva Gosvami concludes, therefore, that it was by the influence  of
this prema-bhakti  alone  that  Srila  Vyasa  realized  in  his  trance  the
bhagavat-tattva along with the maya-tattva, jiva-tattva, and  bhakti-tattva.
In other words, he saw the original Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri  Krsna,
along with His external, marginal, and  internal  potencies.  This  material
creation is the manifestation of Lord  Krsna’s  external  potency,  and  the
living entities constitute His marginal potency. The  living  entities  tend
to be overcome and bewildered by Maya, the Lord’s external potency.
   In his pure state the living entity is completely free from the  external
potency’s influence, but when under  Maya’s  control  he  considers  himself
material. This attitude compels him to suffer the repetition  of  birth  and
death, an unnatural, diseaselike condition for the living  being.  Vyasadeva
saw  in  his  trance  the  solution  to  this  predicament—bhakti-yoga,   or
devotional service unto Lord Adhoksaja, beginning with  hearing  about  Him.
Since most  of  human  society  is  ignorant  of  this  solution,  Vyasadeva
composed Srimad-Bhagavatam to propagate it.
   The term bhakti-yoga mentioned in Bhagavatam 1.7.6.  refers  to  sadhana-
bhakti, which is the stage of devotional service in practice. This stage  is
based on strict following of devotional regulations.  In  prema-bhakti,  the
advanced  stage  of  bhakti-yoga,  because  one  is  free  of  all  material
contamination one surely and steadily engages  in  devotional  service  with
spontaneous  affection.  The  devotee  who  has  reached   this   stage   of
advancement generally still follows the  sadhana  principles,  but  inwardly
his  heart  is  bathed  in  waves  of  blissful  emotion  rising  from   his
spontaneous mood of loving service. Srila Vyasadeva  composed  the  Satvata-
samhita,[6] Srimad-Bhagavatam, to explain the principles of  bhakti-yoga  in
the sadhana and prema phases, along with the intermediate  phase  of  bhava-
bhakti, “devotional service with developing ecstasy.”
   In the next Bhagavatam verse (1.7.7), bhakti means prema-bhakti  because,
as the verse states,  only  at  that  stage  is  one  completely  free  from
lamentation, delusion, and fear. The  word  utpadyate  literally  means  “is
generated,” but  here  it  means  “becomes  manifest”  because  prema-bhakti
cannot be generated,  being  the  internal  potency  of  the  Supreme  Lord;
rather, it manifests within  the  heart  of  an  advancing  devotee  by  the
blessings of the Lord and His pure devotee.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami goes on to explain that  although  there  are  various
purusa incarnations of the Supreme Lord who create,  maintain,  and  destroy
this world, the term  purusam  purnam  in  Bhagavatam  1.7.4  indicates  the
original Personality of Godhead, Sri Krsna. Every word  in  a  language  has
its own energy (sakti) by which it conveys its meaning. Words  can  take  on
varied meanings depending on whether they exhibit  their  primary  or  their
secondary energies. Each word has one primary meaning and may  have  several
secondary meanings. When a word  is  not  restricted  by  its  context,  one
should accept its primary meaning. With the term purna-purusa in  Bhagavatam
1.7.4, the unrestricted meaning (mukhya-vrtti) of the word purna  (literally
“complete” or “perfect”) indicates Lord  Sri  Krsna,  who  is  free  of  all
limitations. Lord Visnu’s purusa incarnations are also supreme and  perfect,
but They appear limited in some  ways,  and  these  limitations  distinguish
them from the purna-purusa. This distinction is implied  in  the  Bhagavatam
statement ete camsa-kalah pumsah krsnas tu  bhagavan  svayam:  “All  of  the
above-mentioned incarnations [listed in the  preceding  verses]  are  either
plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of the Lord,  but  Lord
Sri Krsna is the original Personality of Godhead”  (Bhag.  1.3.28).  In  the
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (2.1.43) Srila Rupa Gosvami explains  how  Krsna  has
four qualities that none of His expansions  possess,  namely  His  wonderful
pastimes, His extraordinary associates, His  enchanting  flute-playing,  and
His unsurpassed beauty. This  explanation  of  the  word  purna  is  further
supported by the use of the phrase krsne parama-puruse in Bhagavatam  1.7.7.
Here parama-puruse is in apposition to the name  Krsna,  clearly  indicating
equivalence. Commenting on the use of  a  virtually  identical  term—purusam
param—in the Second Canto of the Bhagavatam (2.3.10),  Sridhara  Svami  says
that it refers to the purna-purusa, or Complete Person.
   Etymologically, purusa means “one who lies down in the  city,”  the  city
here being a metaphor for the body.  Thus  the  word  purusa  indicates  the
Supersoul within each person’s body. The Supersoul is the controller of  the
material energy, but He is never influenced by it. Lord Sri  Krsna,  on  the
other hand, is  never  in  contact  with  the  material  nature,  though  He
controls it through His purusa expansions.
   Sridhara  Svami  uses  the  word  nirupadhi  (“free  from  all   limiting
adjuncts”) in reference to Krsna, who is not the mere purusa but the  purna-
purusa. Unlike the Supersoul, Krsna is free from  all  upadhis.  This  term,
upadhi, is difficult  to  grasp  and  therefore  difficult  to  render  into
English. Sometimes it is translated as “conditioning,” “limitation,”  “false
designation,” or “modifier.” In its  strict  philosophical  usage  it  means
“limiting adjunct,” because an upadhi’s effect is to apparently  modify  the
natural state of an object by its proximity or association, though  in  fact
it has no integral or natural relationship with the object.
   For example, a naturally colorless crystal will appear reddish when  held
before a red flower. The reddish tinge is not part of the crystal’s  nature;
rather, because the crystal is near the red flower, the flower  “conditions”
the crystal to appear reddish. In  this  way  the  flower’s  redness  is  an
upadhi, or limiting adjunct, superimposed on  the  crystal.  Similarly,  the
material body is an upadhi superimposed on the jiva soul. The soul  is  like
a  crystal  in  that  he  is  easily  influenced,  or  “colored,”   by   his
association. Thus the soul’s proximity to the material body causes the  soul
to become mired in material  existence  and  conditioned  by  the  modes  of
nature. In reality both the soul and Supersoul are  nirupadhi,  without  any
limiting adjuncts, just like the Personality of Godhead.
   One might conclude that this nirupadhi condition of the soul implies  his
absolute identity with the impersonal Supreme. This  conclusion  is  negated
by the word yajeta  (“should  worship”)  in  the  statement  yajeta  purusam
param, “One should worship the Supreme Person” (Bhag. 2.3.10). The root  yaj
means “to worship a Deity.” It would be absurd to advise someone to  worship
a Deity who is an impersonal entity  devoid  of  attributes.  Therefore  the
meaning of purna-purusa is clear without our  resorting  to  the  impersonal
conception of the Supreme to try to explain it.
   When Sridhara Svami says that the Supersoul,  the  purusa,  has  material
nature as His upadhi, one should  not  take  this  statement  to  mean  that
material nature conditions the Lord  as  it  does  the  jiva.  The  intended
meaning is that He controls material  nature  without  coming  into  contact
with it or being influenced by it. The Supersoul  is  always  transcendental
to material nature, even while residing within it, just as a head  of  state
always remains a free man, even when he visits the state prison.
   In his comment on Bhagavatam 2.3.10, Sridhara Svami interprets  the  word
purusa to mean the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  not  the  Supersoul,
because  that  Supreme  Person  is  worshiped  by  advanced  souls  desiring
liberation, souls who are becoming  fit  to  enter  the  spiritual  planets,
beyond the jurisdiction of even the Supersoul.
   The word adhoksaja in Bhagavatam 1.7.6 also refers  to  Lord  Sri  Krsna.
Etymologically this word means “one who is beyond sense perception,” but  it
is also a name Lord Krsna received after killing the  demoness  Putana.  The
Hari-vamsa Purana (Visnu-parva 101.30–32) confirms this:
   adho ’nena sayanena sakatantara-carina
   raksasi nihata raudra sakuni-vesa-dharini
   pputana-nama ghora sa maha-kaya maha-bala
   visadigdham stanam raudram prayacchanti janardane
   pdadrsur nihatam tatra raksasim vana-gocarah
   punar jato ’yam ity ahur uktas tasmad adhoksajah
“When baby Krsna was sleeping in a cradle  under  the  axle  of  a  cart,  a
demoness came as the flying witch called Putana to kill Him.  She  gave  her
poisoned breasts to baby Krsna, but  Krsna  killed  her.  The  residents  of
Vraja saw Putana, who was gigantic,  powerful,  and  terrible  to  look  at,
lying dead in the forest. But Lord Krsna was safe, and the people  therefore
called Him Adhoksaja, ‘He  who  has  taken  another  birth  under  a  cart’s
axle.’”
   The verses describing Veda-vyasa’s trance (Bhag. 1.7.4–7) briefly present
the quintessence of Srimad-Bhagavatam, and with  it  the  main  elements  of
Gaudiya Vaisnava philosophy. Therefore Srila Jiva Gosvami  says  more  about
these verses in the next Text.


===== TS.31 =====
NUMBER: 31
SOURCE LABEL: Text 31

TEXT 31.1
   purvam iti pathe `purvam evaham ihasam' iti  `tat  purusasya  purusatvam'
iti srauta-nirvacana-visesa-puraskarena ca sa  evocyate.  tam  apasyat  Sri-
veda-vyasa iti svarupa-sakti-mantam evety etat svayam  eva  labdham.  purnam
candram apasyad ity ukte kanti-mantam apasyad iti labhyate.
   Even if we consider the alternative reading of purvam instead  of  purnam
in the verse quoted above [Bhagavatam 1.7.4], still the reference here  will
be to the Personality of Godhead. This is shown by the statements  of  Vedic
sruti: “[The Lord said,] I existed here prior (purvam) to  everything  else”
and  “That  [existence  prior  to  everything   else]   is   the   essential
characteristic of the Lord (purusa).”
   When it is said that Sri Vyasa saw  the  Lord,  we  should  automatically
understand that  in  addition  Vyasa  saw  His  svarupa-sakti,  or  internal
potency, just as when it is said  that  a  person  sees  a  full  moon,  the
implication is that he also sees its effulgence.


   TEXT 31.2
   ata eva
   tvam adyah purusah saksad isvarah prakrteh parah
   mayam vyudasya cic-chaktya kaivalye sthita atmani
   @VCONTINUE = ity uktam. ata eva `mayam ca tad-apasrayam' ity anena tasmin
apa apakrsta asrayo yasya  niliya  sthitatvad  iti  mayaya  na  tat-svarupa-
bhutatvam  ity  api  labhyate.  vaksyate  ca  `maya  paraity  abhimukhe   ca
vilajjamana' iti.
   Thus it is said:
   “You are the original Personality of Godhead,  who  expand  Yourself  all
over the creations and are transcendental to the material energy.  You  have
cast away the effects of the material  energy  by  dint  of  Your  spiritual
potency. You  are  always  situated  in  eternal  bliss  and  transcendental
knowledge” [Bhag. 1.7.23].
   Therefore we understand the phrase mayam ca tad-apasrayam [in  Bhagavatam
1.7.4] to mean that Maya takes shelter  of  Him  in  an  inferior  position,
hiding from His  sight;  thus  she  does  not  constitute  His  svarupa,  or
essential nature. As it is said later on, “Maya, feeling ashamed, runs  away
from the Lord’s direct presence” [Bhag. 2.7.47].


   TEXT 31.3
   svarupa-saktir  iyam  atraiva  vyakti-bhavisyati  `anarthopasamam  saksad
bhakti-yogam adhoksaje' ity anena `atmaramas ca' ity anena ca.  purvatra  hi
bhakti-yoga-prabhavah   khalv   asau    mayabhibhavakataya    svarupa-sakti-
vrttitvenaiva gamyate paratra ca  te  guna  brahmanandasyapy  upari-carataya
svarupa-sakteh parama-vrttitam evarhantiti.  mayadhisthatr-purusas  tu  tad-
amsatvena brahma ca  tadiya-nirvisesavirbhavatvena  tad-antar-bhavenaprthak-
drstatvat prthan nokte iti jïeyam. tad etac  ca  dvitiya-trtiya-sandarbhayoh
susthu pratipatsyate. ato ’tra purva-vad eva sambandhi-tattvam nirdharitam.
   We shall explain the Lord’s svarupa-sakti when we discuss the two  verses
beginning anarthopasamam saksad  bhakti-yogam  adhoksaje  and  atmaramas  ca
[Bhagavatam 1.7.6 and 10, respectively]. From the statement in the first  of
these two verses that devotional service can  subdue  the  material  energy,
Maya, we can infer that the power of devotional service  is  a  function  of
the Lord’s internal energy. The second verse implies that the  qualities  of
Lord Hari constitute the svarupa-sakti’s highest function, superior even  to
the bliss of Brahman.
   These verses do not separately  mention  either  Paramatma,  the  Supreme
Lord’s plenary portion who controls Maya, or  Brahman,  the  Supreme  Lord’s
nondifferentiated aspect. The reason for this omission is that we  see  both
the Paramatma and  Brahman  were  seen  to  exist  as  included  within  the
Personality of Godhead, not  rather than existing separately, a  fact  which
we  will  be  thoroughly  demonstrated  later,  in  the  second  and   third
Sandarbhas. Thus here, as before, the sambandhi-tattva, the essential  topic
of discussion in Srimad-Bhagavatam, has been defined.


   COMMENTARY
   Analysis of Srila Vyasadeva’s Trance, Part II
   Some editions  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  have  the  word  purvam  (“existing
before”) in place of purnam in
   TEXT 1.7.4. This difference does not change  the  import  of  the  verse,
however. The word purusa  can  also  mean  “He  who  existed  prior  to  the
creation”: pura asit iti purusah. This phrase refers to the Supreme Lord  as
the source of everything. And this Supreme Lord is Krsna, as He confirms  in
the Bhagavad-gita (10.8): aham sarvasya  prabhavah.  “I  am  the  source  of
everything.” Being the source of everything is the essential  characteristic
of the purusa. Since existing prior to everything else is the idea  conveyed
by the adjective purvam, the phrase purusam purvam is equivalent to  purusam
purnam insofar as indicating the Supreme Lord, Krsna.
   Sri Vyasa saw the Lord’s potencies along with the Lord Himself,  just  as
one always sees the effulgent  moonlight  along  with  the  full  moon.  The
energies of the Lord are always present  along  with  Him,  inasmuch  as  an
object’s attributes are always present along with the object. In  the  Visnu
Purana (6.5.79) the attributes  of  Bhagavan,  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, are listed:
   jnana-sakti-balaisvarya-virya-tejamsy asesatah
   bhagavac-chabda-vacyani vina heyair gunadibhih
“The word bhagavan indicates knowledge,  sensory  power,  strength,  wealth,
prowess, and valor—all without limit, and all completely devoid of  material
qualities  and  their  effects.”  The  Supreme   Person   has   multifarious
potencies, of which  three  are  primary.  As  the  Visnu  Purana  (1.12.69)
states, hladini sandhini samvit  tvayy  eka  sarva-samsraye:  “The  hladini,
sandhini, and samvit potencies exist only in You  [the  Supreme  Lord],  who
are the shelter of everything.” Hladini  is  the  Lord’s  pleasure  potency,
sandhini His supporting potency, and samvit  His  cognition  potency.  These
three potencies  constitute  the  Lord’s  svarupa,  or  essential,  internal
nature. Srila Jiva  Gosvami  will  give  a  detailed  explanation  of  these
potencies in the Bhagavat-sandarbha.
   In the spiritual sky these potencies  are  inherent  in  the  Lord’s  own
person, but they are also present in the individual personal  forms  of  His
associates. In
   TEXT 47 Srila Jiva Gosvami will identify the form  of  the  Supreme  Lord
that Srila Vyasadeva saw as Krsna in Vrndavana, where  the  Lord  is  always
present with His most intimate devotees. Srimati Radharani is  Lord  Krsna’s
personified pleasure potency, and  with  Her  the  Lord  performs  His  most
intimate pastimes. Therefore it should be  understood  that  in  his  trance
Srila Vyasa also saw Srimati Radhika along  with  Her  associates,  for  the
Lord is never separated from His internal potencies.
   Besides the Lord’s three  internal  potencies,  Vyasa  saw  His  external
potency (Maya) and His marginal potency (the jivas). Maya  is  not  part  of
the Lord’s svarupa. She is personally present  in  His  entourage,  but  she
chooses to remain out of His sight. Therefore she can  never  influence  the
Lord or His internal potencies. Generally a  female  influences  a  male  by
appearing before him, but Mayadevi,  the  female,  external  energy  of  the
Supreme, cannot influence the Lord. Therefore it is said  that  she  remains
out of His view. As it is said (Bhag. 2.7.47),  maya  paraity  abhimukhe  ca
vilajjamana: “Mayadevi keeps away from the Lord,  feeling  ashamed  to  come
before of Him.” Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana compares Maya to  a  maidservant
who discharges her duties outside the king’s inner quarters.  She  does  not
have the same privileges as his queens, who  are  like  the  Supreme  Lord’s
internal potencies in that they can directly associate with their master  at
all times.
   Maya, the Lord’s external energy, is inferior to both  His  svarupa-sakti
and His marginal energy, the jivas. Still, she can subdue  the  jivas.  This
vulnerability of the jivas to illusion is stated in Bhagavatam 1.7.5:
   yaya sammohito jiva atmanam tri-gunatmakam
   paro ’pi manute ’nartham tat-krtam cabhipadyate
“Bewildered  by  that  external  energy,   the   living   entity,   although
transcendental to the three modes of material nature, thinks of  himself  as
a material product and thus undergoes the reactions of material miseries.”
   Although both the individual soul and the  Supersoul  are  conscious  and
reside in the same material body, only the jiva is bewildered  by  Maya  and
suffers the material miseries. Maya cannot affect the  Lord  because  He  is
her master; by  His  inconceivable  power  He  remains  forever  beyond  her
influence.
   In the Bhagavad-gita (7.5) Lord Krsna  tells  Arjuna  that  His  marginal
energy, the jiva, is superior to His separated, material energy,  Maya.  One
may then ask, How does the superior jiva  come  under  the  control  of  the
inferior  nature,  Maya?  The  answer  is  twofold:  because  the  jiva   is
infinitesimal, and also because Maya can transcend logic in her actions.  In
the Third Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam (3.7.9), Maitreya Muni  responds  to  a
question from Vidura as follows:
   seyam bhagavato maya yan nayena virudhyate
   isvarasya vimuktasya karpanyam uta bandhanam
“The illusory energy of the Supreme Lord acts contrary to logic  [i.e.,  her
behavior cannot be understood simply through logic]; otherwise,  how  is  it
possible that the living entity, who is  conscious  and  liberated,  becomes
bound and miserable?” Commenting on this verse, Srila Visvanatha  Cakravarti
Thakura gives an analogy: Although the sun is  powerfully  effulgent,  still
the cloud, generated from  the  sun’s  potency,  can  cover  it.  Similarly,
although the jiva is by nature superior to Maya, she still has the power  to
cover him.
   Another important point made in this section is that the  description  of
Vyasa’s trance does not explicitly  mention  either  the  Supersoul  or  the
impersonal Brahman effulgence. The Supersoul (Paramatma)  is  the  expansion
of the Lord who presides over the affairs of the  material  energy.  In  the
Bhagavad-gita (9.10) Lord Krsna  says,  mayadhyaksena  prakrtih  suyate  sa-
caracaram: “This material nature is working under  My  direction,  producing
all  moving  and  nonmoving  beings.”  Here   “My”   means   “My   Paramatma
expansion’s,” since it is through His  Paramatma  feature  that  Lord  Krsna
regulates the workings of the material world. Srila Jiva Gosvami points  out
that since the Paramatma expands from Krsna and  is  entirely  dependent  on
Him, the description of Vyasadeva’s trance need not  mention  the  Paramatma
separately. The same holds true  for  Brahman,  which  is  nothing  but  the
effulgence  emanating  from  the  Lord’s  transcendental  body.   Like   the
Paramatma, Brahman has no existence independent of the Lord. Krsna  confirms
this in the Bhagavad-gita (14.27):  brahmano  hi  pratisthaham.  “I  am  the
basis of the impersonal  Brahman.”  According  to  the  Nirukti  dictionary,
pratisthiyate asminn iti pratistha: “Pratistha means  ‘shelter  or  basis.’”
Just as the sun globe is the basis of the sunshine, so Krsna  is  the  basis
of the Brahman effulgence.
   From this analysis of Veda-vyasa’s trance, it is clear that  the  central
subject of Srimad-Bhagavatam is the Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri  Krsna,
and  that  the  process  for  attaining  Him  is  bhakti-yoga.  Brahman  and
Paramatma, being dependent manifestations of the Lord, cannot  be  separated
from Him, but these two features are not the objects of  Vyasadeva’s  trance
and so cannot  be  the  central  subjects  of  His  greatest  work,  Srimad-
Bhagavatam. We should nonetheless note that one who realizes Bhagavan,  Lord
Krsna, automatically realizes Brahman and Paramatma, in the  same  way  that
one who acquires a million dollars automatically possesses ten dollars,  one
hundred dollars, and similar small sums.
   In the next section Srila Jiva Gosvami discusses how  the  living  entity
comes to be bound up by Maya.


                              TATTVA SANDARBHA


                            BY SRILA JIVA GOSWAMI


                                   [PART6]


===== TS.32 =====
NUMBER: 32
SOURCE LABEL: Text 32

TEXT 32.1
   atha prak-pratipaditasyaivabhidheyasya prayojanasya ca sthapakam  jivasya
svarupata eva paramesvarad vailaksanyam apasyad ity aha yayeti. yaya  mayaya
sammohito jivah svayam cid-rupatvena tri-gunatmakaj jadat paro  ’py  atmanam
tri-gunatmakam  jadam  dehadi-sanghatam  manute  tan-manana-krtam   anartham
samsara-vyasanam cabhipadyate.
   The process (abhidheya) and the goal  (prayojana),  as  we  have  defined
them, are based on the essential difference between the Lord and the  living
entity. That Sri Vyasa saw this distinction is shown by the verse  beginning
yaya [Bhag. 1.7.5]. Although the living entity is  by  nature  pure  spirit,
transcendental to the three inert material modes, when deluded  by  Maya  he
considers himself a product of those modes, the inert  material  body.  This
delusion causes the living entity to suffer  unwanted  consequences,  namely
the miseries of repeated birth and death.


   TEXT 32.2
   tad evam jivasya cid-rupatve ’pi `yaya sammohitah' iti  `manute'  iti  ca
svarupa-bhuta-jïana-salitvam vyanakti prakasaika-rupasya  tejasah  sva-para-
prakasana-sakti-vat.
   ajïanenavrtam jïanam tena muhyanti jantavah
   @VCONTINUE = iti  Sri-gitabhyah.  tad  evam  upadher  eva  jivatvam  tan-
nasasyaiva moksatvam iti matantaram parihrtavan. atra `yaya sammohitah'  ity
anena tasya eva tatra kartrtvam bhagavatas tatrodasinatvam matam.
   Furthermore, not only does the living being  consist  of  pure  spiritual
consciousness, but he also possesses consciousness as  a  component  of  his
essential  nature,  just  as  light,   which   consists   of   nothing   but
illumination, also possesses the  capacity  to  illumine  itself  and  other
things. That the  living  entity  possesses  consciousness  is  implied  [in
Bhagavatam 1.7.5] by the words yaya sammohitah (“deluded  by  that  [Maya]”)
and manute (“he  considers”)  and  confirmed  by  the  following  words  [in
Bhagavad-gita 5.15]:
   “Living beings are bewildered because their consciousness is  covered  by
ignorance.”
   Thus is refuted the contrary opinion that the  jiva  exists  only  as  an
upadhi of Brahman and that liberation is  simply  the  elimination  of  this
upadhi.
   Here [in Bhag. 1.7.5] the phrase yaya sammohitah shows that Maya alone is
responsible for deluding the living being; the Lord remains uninvolved.


   TEXT 32.3
   vaksyate ca
   vilajjamanaya yasya sthatum iksa-pathe ’muya
   vimohita vikatthante mamaham iti durdhiyah
   @VCONTINUE = iti. atra vilajjamanaya  ity  anenedam  ayati,  tasya  jiva-
sammohanam karma Sri-bhagavate na rocata  iti  yady  api  sa  svayam  janati
tathapi `bhayam dvitiyabhinivesatah syad isad  apetasya'  iti  disa  jivanam
anadi-bhagavad-ajïana-maya-vaimukhyam        asahamana        svarupavaranam
asvarupavesam ca karoti.
   Later Srimad-Bhagavatam [2.5.13] states:
   “The illusory energy of the Lord cannot stand  in  front  of  Him,  being
ashamed of her position, but those who are bewildered  by  her  always  talk
nonsense, being absorbed in thoughts of ‘I’ and ‘mine.’”
   Here we can infer from the phrase “being  ashamed”  (vilajjamanaya)  that
although Maya knows her work of  bewildering  the  living  beings  does  not
please the Supreme Lord, still she cannot tolerate  that  they  have  turned
their  backs  on  Him  because  of  their  ignorance  of   Him,   which   is
beginningless. Srimad-Bhagavatam  [11.2.37]  describes  the  result  of  the
jivas’ turning from the Lord: “When  the  living  beings  are  attracted  to
something other than the Lord, they become fearful.” Therefore  Maya  covers
their real nature and entices them to identify with matter.


   COMMENTARY
   The Living Entity Is Distinct from the Lord
   In this
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami shows how service to the Lord is the  process  of
self-realization (abhidheya) and  how  eternal  love  of  God  is  the  goal
(prayojana). Since love of God is eternal, the Supreme Lord and  the  living
entities must be eternally distinct, because wherever there  is  service  or
love, the server and the served  or  the  lover  and  the  beloved  must  be
separate individuals.
   According to the Mayavada impersonalists this distinction  of  individual
selves exists only in the conditioned (vyavaharika) stage. In the  liberated
(paramarthika) stage all such distinctions dissolve because  on  that  level
Brahman alone exists. Impersonalists  insist  that  since  Brahman  and  the
living being are absolutely one and the same, there can  be  no  distinction
of identities in the reality of Brahman. The Mayavadis go  on  to  say  that
when Brahman contacts Maya, Maya acts as its  upadhi  and  Brahman  is  then
known as isvara (God) and the jivas. Apart from  these  appearances  arising
from Brahman’s proximity to  Maya,  neither  isvara  nor  the  jivas  exist.
Concerning the jivas, featureless Brahman enters into delusion and  displays
the jivas' masquerade forms and personalities birth after birth—and all  for
no reason other than Brahman’s adulteration by Maya. And this  same  deluded
Brahman will be redeemed when he simply gives up his false  designations  on
the strength of acquired knowledge of Brahman.
   All this goes counter to what Vyasadeva actually saw in  His  trance.  He
saw that the jivas are intrinsically eternal  spiritual  entities,  separate
individuals in their own right. He further saw that Maya overcomes only  the
jivas, not Brahman (isvara, the Personality  of  Godhead);  indeed,  He  saw
that Maya, far from overcoming the Supreme Lord,  could  not  even  bare  to
face Him. He also saw  that  God  Himself  is  not  directly  involved  with
deluding the jivas. In sum, Vyasadeva realized that  the  Lord,  the  jivas,
and Maya are all eternal, and that the Lord supports the other two.
   In Bhagavatam 1.7.5 the words sammohitah (“becoming deluded”) and  manute
(“he then thinks”) are applied to the jiva,  indicating  that  delusion  and
its effects, ignorance and misery, are not  part  of  his  original  nature.
These two words also indicate that the jiva is both  consciousness  and  the
possessor thereof. As a light bulb  simultaneously  illuminates  itself  and
the objects around it, so the jiva is simultaneously  conscious  of  himself
and objects outside himself. In  other  words,  cognition  is  an  intrinsic
aspect of his nature, not a temporarily acquired  capacity,  which  is  what
the Mayavada doctrine implies by positing that  the  jiva’s  attributes  are
only apparently real (as is the jiva himself) and that to gain salvation  he
has to acquire knowledge of his oneness with Brahman.
   The theistic understanding of the jivas’ situation in this world, gleaned
from analyzing Srila Vyasadeva’s trance, is that Maya  cannot  tolerate  the
jivas’ refusal to serve her Lord, and so she covers the  knowledge  of  such
rebellious jivas and imprisons them in  material  bodies.  Maya’s  principal
functions are to punish and to rectify the jivas who have turned  away  from
the Personality of Godhead. Her motive is not to inflict  suffering  but  to
encourage the  fallen  jivas  to  accept  rectification  by  inquiring  into
transcendental knowledge. Lord Krsna therefore  says  in  the  Bhagavad-gita
(4.37) that transcendental knowledge burns all the bonds  of  karma  in  the
same way that fire burns fuel, because once a person attains  transcendental
knowledge, Maya need no longer punish him.
   Sometimes, from  our  mundane  point  of  view  there  appears  to  be  a
contradiction between the writings of the great acaryas. An example of  this
arises from Srila Jiva Gosvami’s use in this
   TEXT of the term anadi (“beginningless”) to describe Maya’s  bewilderment
of the jivas. From the way Jiva Gosvami uses  this  word  elsewhere  in  the
Sandarbhas, it appears that he intends for his  readers  to  understand  the
word literally—that Maya’s conditioning of each jiva has  no  beginning  but
ends when a jiva becomes Krsna conscious. Srila  Prabhupada,  however,  took
the word  anadi  to  mean  “from  time  immemorial”  in  similar  scriptural
contexts, indicating that he understood the jiva’s conditioning to  have  an
untraceable beginning. He expresses his understanding of this issue  in  his
translation of and
   COMMENTARY  on a verse in  the  Caitanya-caritamrta  that  Lord  Caitanya
spoke to Sanatana Gosvami (Cc. Madhya 20.117):
   krsna bhuli’ sei jiva anadi-bahirmukha
   ataeva maya tare deya samsara-duhkha
“Forgetting Krsna, the living entity has  been  attracted  by  the  external
feature from time immemorial. Therefore the  illusory  energy  [Maya]  gives
him all kinds of misery in  his  material  existence.”  Purport:  “When  the
living entity [the jiva] forgets his constitutional position as  an  eternal
servant of Krsna, he is immediately  entrapped  by  the  illusory,  external
energy. The living entity is originally part and  parcel  of  Krsna  and  is
therefore the superior  energy  of  Krsna.<193>[However,]  he  is  sometimes
attracted by the external, illusory energy,<193>and this  is  the  beginning
of his material life. When he enters the material energy he is subjected  to
the threefold time measurement—past, present,  and  future.  Past,  present,
and future belong only to the material world;  they  do  not  exist  in  the
spiritual world. The living entity is eternal, and  he  existed  before  the
creation  of  this  material  world.  Unfortunately  he  has  forgotten  his
relationship with Krsna. The  living  entity’s  forgetfulness  is  described
herein as anadi, which indicates that it has existed since time  immemorial.
One  should  understand  that  due  to  his  desire  to  enjoy  himself   in
competition with Krsna, the living entity comes into material existence.”
   A deluded jiva retains  his  capacity  to  know  the  Supreme  Lord.  His
condition is somewhat like that of a covered light bulb:  the  bulb’s  light
may not be  visible  beyond  the  covering,  but  it  still  shines  within.
Similarly, although the conditioned jiva’s  ability  to  know  the  Lord  is
covered, it still exists. In this conditioned state  the  jiva  misuses  his
mind and senses and misdirects his natural  propensity  to  serve.  Thus  he
suffers. But when he  uses  his  mind  and  senses  properly  by  practicing
sadhana-bhakti, his true nature begins to emerge, and  if  he  continues  on
the path of bhakti he attains his original identity and  is  established  in
the unending bliss of prema-bhakti. In the Paramatma-sandarbha,  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami discusses in more detail  this  and  other  aspects  of  the  jiva’s
nature.
   One may ask why the all-powerful Lord does not stop Maya from bewildering
the jiva. Srila Jiva Gosvami answers this question in the next Text.


===== TS.33 =====
NUMBER: 33
SOURCE LABEL: Text 33

TEXT 33.1
   Sri-bhagavams canadita eva bhaktayam prapaïcadhikarinyam tasyam daksinyam
langhitum na saknoti. tatha tad-bhayenapi  jivanam  sva-sammukhyam  vaïchann
upadisati
   daivi hy esa guna-mayi mama maya duratyaya
   mam eva ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te


   @VL1 = satam prasangan mama virya-samvido
   @VL2 = bhavanti hrt-karna-rasayanah kathah
   @VL1 = taj-josanad asv apavarga-vartmani
   @VL2 = sraddha ratir bhaktir anukramisyati
   @VCONTINUE = iti ca.
   For His part, the Supreme Lord cannot withdraw His favor from Maya,  whom
He has delegated as the controller of the  material  creation  and  who  has
always been His devotee. Still, He wants the jivas to turn favorably  toward
Him, even if they must  do  so  out  of  fear  of  Maya,  and  therefore  He
instructs them [in Bhagavad-gita 7.14]:
   “This divine energy of Mine, consisting of the three  modes  of  material
nature, is difficult to overcome. But those who  have  surrendered  unto  Me
can easily cross beyond it.”
   And [in Bhagavatam 3.25.25]:
   “In the association of pure devotees,  discussion  of  the  pastimes  and
activities of the Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  is  very  pleasing  and
satisfying to the ear and the heart. By cultivating such knowledge a  person
gradually becomes advanced on the path of liberation, and thereafter  he  is
freed, and his attraction becomes fixed. Then real devotion  and  devotional
service begin.”


   TEXT 33.2
   lilaya Srimad-vyasa-rupena tu visistataya tad upadistavan  ity  anantaram
evayasyaty  `anarthopasamam  saksat'  iti.  tasmad  dvayor   api   tat   tat
samaïjasam jïeyam. nanu maya khalu saktih saktis ca karya-ksamatvam  tac  ca
dharma-visesas tasya katham  lajjadikam.  ucyata  evam  saty  api  bhagavati
tasam  saktinam  adhisthatr-devyah  sruyante  yatha  kenopanisadi  mahendra-
mayayoh samvadah. tad astam prastutam prastuyate.
   In His pastime form of Sri Vyasa, the Lord has very explicitly instructed
the living beings in this way [namely, that they should surrender to Him  so
they can transcend Maya]. This we shall see shortly, in  our  discussion  of
the verse beginning anarthopasamam saksat [Bhag. 1.7.6]. Thus both the  Lord
and Maya have acted quite properly.
   But, one may object, if Maya is only an  energy  and  an  energy  is  the
capacity to do some work and is moreover just a quality  possessed  by  some
entity,  how  then  can  Maya  feel  ashamed   and   have   other,   similar
characteristics?
   The answer is that although Maya is in fact an energy, we  do  hear  from
the  Vedic  scriptures  about  female  deities  who  preside  over  energies
residing in the Supreme Lord. We see an example  of  this  in  the  dialogue
between Lord Indra and Maya in the Kena Upanisad. In any case, we shall  now
let this matter stand and return to the main topic of our discussion.


   COMMENTARY
   Maya Is a Devotee of the Lord
   As Srila Jiva Gosvami explained in the previous Text, the Supreme Lord is
not pleased that Maya has to delude the  jivas;  therefore  Maya  feels  too
embarrassed to face the Lord. One may ask, “If  the  Lord  is  all-powerful,
why does He not intervene?” Our answer is that the Lord has  appointed  Maya
the presiding deity of the material creation and  she  has  been  performing
this service faithfully since time immemorial. Because she is  His  devotee,
He kindly does not interfere with her service.
   But this reply may lead to a further doubt: Besides  being  all-powerful,
the Supreme Lord is said to be  unlimitedly  merciful,  always  thinking  of
everyone’s welfare. Why then does He fail to stop Maya  from  harassing  the
jivas? To this Jiva Gosvami replies that even though the Lord does not  stop
Maya,  He  teaches  the  jivas  how  to  get  free  from  her  clutches   by
surrendering to Him. Maya will never again harass any  jiva  who  has  taken
full shelter of the Supreme Lord.
   Still a puzzle remains: Why does the Lord allow Maya to create  obstacles
for the jiva even when he wants to surrender to Him? Why does He  allow  her
to repeatedly  present  various  allurements  that  prevent  the  jiva  from
discriminating between proper  and  improper  action  and  thus  baffle  his
attempts at surrendering?
   Srila Jiva Gosvami answers this question by citing  the  verse  beginning
satam prasangan mama virya-samvidah, which Lord  Kapila  speaks  in  Srimad-
Bhagavatam  (3.25.25).  This  verse  explains  that  devotees  of  the  Lord
associate favorably with one another and always  relish  talking  about  the
Lord’s pastimes, which are a tonic for the hearts and ears of the  sick  and
weak jivas. This tonic  immunizes  them  against  the  disease  of  material
illusion and gradually brings them back to the healthy  condition  of  life,
namely the Supreme Lord’s devotional service. The Lord’s  only  activity  in
the spiritual world is enjoying loving exchanges with His devotees, and  His
enjoyment would be disturbed by the intrusion of  unhealthy  jivas—that  is,
souls who have  not  become  completely  purified  of  material  desire  and
reawakened their pure love for the  Lord.  Maya  therefore  employs  various
means to make sure no unfit souls bother  the  Lord.  Because  this  is  her
assigned service to Him, He does not interfere.
   The Personality of Godhead  has  not,  however,  employed  Maya  just  to
inflict miseries on the jivas. She does that, but as mentioned earlier,  her
real purpose is to chasten the jivas, to  encourage  them  to  turn  to  the
Lord. The punishment she metes  out  serves  three  purposes:  to  give  the
living entities the reactions for their sinful deeds,  to  deter  them  from
further transgressions, and to impel them to search for a way  out  of  this
world of suffering. Since this punishment ultimately benefits the  jivas  by
uniting them with the Personality of Godhead, He generally does  not  choose
to come between the jivas and Maya. The governor of  a  state  will  usually
not interfere when the court system sends  a  criminal  to  prison.  On  the
contrary, he may commend the policemen who captured the  wrong-doer.  People
do not think the governor is cruel to employ such  able  policemen,  and  in
the end, when the criminal is rehabilitated and freed on parole, the  former
lawbreaker himself may thank the governor.
   So God’s motive for creating the prison house of this material  world  is
actually to induce the rebellious jivas to surrender  to  Him  and  take  up
loving service to Him. Only in  this  way  can  they  gain  liberation  from
Maya’s  clutches.  In  Srimad-Bhagavatam  (10.87.2)  Sri  Sukadeva   Gosvami
confirms that this is the purpose of the creation:
   buddhindriya-manah-pranan jananam asrjat prabhuh
   matrartham ca bhavartham ca atmane ’kalpanaya ca
“The Supreme Lord manifested the material intelligence,  senses,  mind,  and
vital air of the living entities so that they could  indulge  their  desires
for  sense  gratification,  take  repeated  births  to  engage  in  fruitive
activities,  become  elevated  in  future  lives,  and   ultimately   attain
liberation.”
   One may still object that even if the Supreme Lord is not actively cruel,
He is indifferent to the plight of  the  jivas.  This  is  another  mistaken
notion. Far from  being  indifferent  to  the  jivas’  suffering,  the  Lord
frequently appears in this world to enlighten the  fallen  populace  on  the
pre
   TEXT of educating such intimate associates of His as Arjuna and  Uddhava.
Sometimes He incarnates as Veda-vyasa or as  another  instructor  to  preach
the message of bhakti and uplift the wretched jivas. All this  He  does  out
of His causeless mercy upon the fallen jivas, who, as we have  learned  from
the pramana portion of Sri Tattva-sandarbha, can never  understand  anything
beyond the material world by their own endeavors.
   So it is out of His causeless mercy  that  the  Supreme  Lord  gives  the
entrapped jivas access to spiritual knowledge through the Vedas.  Later  on,
as the Kali-yuga begins  and  the  jivas  all  but  lose  their  ability  to
comprehend spiritual knowledge, He further  helps  them  by  explaining  the
same message in the Itihasas and Puranas. Finally, He  reveals  the  essence
of all knowledge in the form of Srimad-Bhagavatam. So it can hardly be  said
that the Lord is indifferent to the plight of the jivas.
   Once a jiva takes advantage  of  the  Lord’s  arrangement  for  spiritual
education and comes to the point of transcendental realization, he need  not
fear any punishment for his previous misdeeds, no matter how  dreadful  they
were. As the Lord says in the Bhagavad-gita (4.37):
   yathaidhamsi samiddho ’gnir bhasma-sat kurute ’rjuna
   jïanagnih sarva-karmani bhasma-sat kurute tatha
“As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does  the  fire  of
knowledge burn to ashes all reactions  to  material  activities.”  Thus  the
Lord confirms that the punishment of the jivas is meant not  for  inflicting
suffering on them but for awakening them to the  knowledge  that  will  lead
them to freedom from all suffering and to  eternal  life  in  the  spiritual
world.
   Yet another doubt may be raised: If the punishment inflicted on the jivas
is for their ultimate good, why are they  also  allowed  to  enjoy  in  this
world? If they were simply thrown into an ocean of  ceaseless  misery,  they
would  have  no  choice  but  to  quickly  take  complete  shelter  of   the
Personality of Godhead.
   We address this doubt with a twofold reply:  First,  we  point  out  that
ceaseless misery is not good  for  developing  transcendental  understanding
because one’s mind becomes too disturbed to contemplate  scriptural  truths.
Second, ceaseless misery is not necessary  because  any  jiva  with  even  a
little rudimentary transcendental knowledge will realize that  there  is  no
real happiness in this material world.  In  the  Bhagavad-gita  (8.15)  Lord
Krsna characterizes  this  world  as  temporary  and  devoid  of  happiness:
anityam asukham lokam. The  so-called  happiness  one  experiences  here  is
nothing but a temporary cessation or diminution of misery. It  is  like  the
pleasure felt by a man who is repeatedly dunked in water  and  then  brought
to the surface just before drowning. Upon gulping down the  life-giving  air
he feels great relief and  joy,  but  such  happiness  is  really  only  the
temporary absence of continual misery. Lord Krsna therefore advises  us  not
to strive for the so-called happiness of this material  world:  sama-duhkha-
sukham dhiram so ’mrtatvaya kalpate. ”One who  remains  equipoised  in  both
misery and happiness is qualified for liberation” (Bg. 2.15).  Only  such  a
person can taste real happiness; others  experience  only  the  illusion  of
happiness.
   In conclusion, therefore, the Lord has designed a  two-part  program  for
both chastening and rehabilitating the jivas: On the one  hand,  Maya  kicks
them,  and  on  the  other,  the  Lord  instructs   them   through   various
incarnations, the Vedic scriptures,  and  His  pure  devotees.  Thus  Maya’s
actions and the Lord’s perfectly complement one another.
   Although Maya is the Lord’s material energy, she also exists in  her  own
personal form. All the energies of the Lord have  their  personal  features.
(Srila Jiva Gosvami will discuss this point in more detail in Sri  Bhagavat-
sandarbha.) That Maya has  a  personal  form  is  evident  from  a  dialogue
between Lord Indra and Mayadevi narrated in the third chapter  of  the  Kena
Upanisad: Once there was a war between the demigods and the demons. After  a
long struggle, the demigods prevailed by the Supreme Lord’s mercy, but  they
mistakenly ascribed their victory to their own valor and  became  proud.  To
humble them, the Lord appeared before them in the guise of a  Yaksa.  Unable
to identify the Yaksa, they appointed Agni, the fire-god, to  find  out  who
He was. When Agni asked the Yaksa to identify Himself, He placed a straw  in
front of Agni and said, “Burn it.” With all his power Agni  could  not  burn
the straw. Then Vayu, the air-god, was sent to identify the  Yaksa,  but  he
could not blow the straw away. Next Lord Indra  approached  the  Yaksa,  but
the mysterious personality disappeared. Finally Mayadevi appeared  to  Indra
in the form of Uma and told him that the  Yaksa  was  in  fact  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
   Many similar accounts in the Vedas and Puranas show that Maya  and  other
energies of the Lord have their own personal forms. Thus the description  of
how Vyasa saw Maya standing behind the Lord  out  of  embarrassment  is  not
figurative.
   One more question might be asked: If Maya, the predominating deity of the
material energy, can manage all her own affairs, what need is there for  the
Paramatma to control this world? Lord Krsna  answers  in  the  Bhagavad-gita
(14.4):
   sarva-yonisu kaunteya murtayah sambhavanti yah
   tasam brahma mahad yonir aham bija-pradah pita
“It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kunti, are  made
possible by birth in this material nature, and that  I  am  the  seed-giving
father.” Just as a woman cannot conceive a  child  without  the  help  of  a
potent man, Maya cannot manage the material world without the  help  of  the
Paramatma. Maya has her innate potencies for serving the Supreme  Lord,  but
still she needs His help in carrying out her duties. For this  reason  Vyasa
saw that she was dependent on  the  Lord,  a  fact  Krsna  confirms  in  the
Bhagavad-gita (9.10) when He says that this material nature,  which  is  one
of His energies, is ultimately working under His direction.
   The next
   TEXT further explains Sri Vyasa’s trance.


===== TS.34 =====
NUMBER: 34
SOURCE LABEL: Text 34

TEXT 34
   tatra jivasya  tadrsa-cid-rupatve  ’pi  paramesvarato  vailaksanyam  tad-
apasrayam iti yaya sammohita iti ca darsayati.
   Like the Lord, the jiva is purely spiritual, yet still  he  is  different
from the Lord. This truth is indicated by the words tad-apasrayam (“Maya  is
outside Him  yet  supported  by  Him,”  [in  Bhagavatam.  1.7.4])  and  yaya
sammohitah (“deluded by Maya,” [in Bhag. 1.7.5]).


   COMMENTARY
   The Jiva Is Conscious and Distinct from the Lord
   In Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.7.4 the words used to describe Maya’s relationship
with the Lord are tad-apasrayam. This phrase indicates that  in  His  trance
Srila Vyasadeva saw that the Supreme Personality of  Godhead  supports  Maya
and that she has no influence over Him. The prefix apa means “separate”  and
“inferior.” Maya is separate from the Lord in the sense that she is not  one
of His internal energies. That she is ashamed to  appear  in  front  of  the
Lord indicates she is inferior to both Him and His internal  potencies.  For
this reason she cannot influence  Him,  though  she  is  dependent  on  Him.
Therefore, as mentioned earlier, she has been compared to a maidservant  who
works outside a king's inner apartments.
   While unable to influence the Lord or His internal  potencies,  Maya  can
influence the jiva, as the words yaya sammohitah indicate.  Being  part  and
parcel of God, the jiva is conscious by nature, yet he is  not  all-powerful
like God, for his potencies are limited. Thus the Lord  controls  Maya,  and
she controls the limited jivas when they are not united with Him in  bhakti-
yoga. Just as sparks separated from a fire lose  their  brilliance  but  not
their existence, so when the living beings are separated from the Lord  they
forget their  nature  and  are  absorbed  in  illusion.  The  Supreme  Lord,
however, is never affected by illusion. Thus jivas are  different  from  the
Lord, though they are qualitatively equal with Him in some respects.
   Commenting on Bhagavatam 1.7.4, Srila Baladeva  Vidyabhusana  points  out
that besides seeing the Personality of Godhead, Maya, and  the  jiva,  Srila
Vyasa also saw the time energy, as indicated by such verbs as  apasyat  (“He
saw”), sammohitah (“he is bewildered”), and manute (“he considers”). How  is
this? Because all these verbs indicate action, which  in  turn  implies  the
influence of time. As the Bhallaveya-sruti  states,  atha  ha  vava  nityani
purusah prakrtir atma kalah: “The Lord, material nature, the living  entity,
and time are certainly all eternal.” Time’s eternality is also mentioned  by
Parasara Muni in the Visnu Purana (1.2.26):
   anadir bhagavan kalo nanto ’sya dvija vidyate
   avyucchinnas tatas tv ete sarga-sthity-anta-samyamah
“O twice-born Maitreya, supremely powerful time has  no  beginning  or  end.
Thus  the  cycle  of  creation,  maintenance,  and  annihilation   continues
perpetually.” And in the Bhagavad-gita (13.20) Lord Krsna says :
   prakrtim purusam caiva viddhy anadi ubhav api
   vikarams ca gunams caiva viddhi prakrti-sambhavan
“Material nature  and  the  living  entities  should  be  understood  to  be
beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of  matter  are  products
of material nature.” In commenting on this verse  in  his  Sarartha-varsini,
Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakura says, maya-jivayor  api  mac-chaktitvena
anaditvat tayoh samsleso ’py anadir iti bhavah: “[Lord Krsna  says:]  ‘Since
both Maya and the jiva are My energies, both exist  since  time  immemorial.
Therefore the jiva has been in contact with Maya  since  time  immemorial.’”
It follows from this that the  jiva’s  karma  has  been  acting  since  time
immemorial as well.
   Srila Vyasadeva acknowledges that this is the nature of  karma  in  sutra
2.1.35 of the Vedanta: na  karmavibhagad  iti  cen  nanaditvat.  “One  might
object that the law of karma cannot explain the inequality in  the  universe
because to begin with everyone must be equal.  But  this  objection  is  not
valid, since the cycle of creation has no beginning.  Inasmuch  as  creation
has no beginning, karma also has no beginning.”
   Apart from karma, the other four entities Srila Vyasa saw—the Personality
of Godhead,  the  jiva,  material  nature,  and  time—are  eternal,  without
beginning or end.  Of  these  four,  the  Supreme  Lord  and  the  jiva  are
conscious spirit, but the Lord is infinite and the jiva is atomic  in  size.
Time is not conscious, but it is free  from  the  control  of  the  material
modes. It is the cause of the  threefold  division  of  past,  present,  and
future.  The  material  energy  is  inert   and   is   composed   of   three
modes—goodness,   passion   and    ignorance.    Matter    thus    undergoes
transformations in time and is the medium  through  which  we  perceive  the
three  divisions  of  time.  Although  karma  has  been  controlling   every
conditioned soul since time immemorial, karma can be brought to a close  for
jivas who perfect the practice of devotional  service  to  Lord  Krsna,  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.  All  this  Srila  Vyasadeva  also  saw.  To
enlighten  the  conditioned  jivas  about  these  all-important  topics,  He
compiled the Satvata-samhita, Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   In the next eight Texts,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  shows  that  Sri  Vyasa’s
experience refutes the popular monistic philosophy of Sri Sankaracarya.


===== TS.35 =====
NUMBER: 35
SOURCE LABEL: Text 35

TEXT 35
   yarhy eva yad ekam cid-rupam brahma mayasrayata-balitam vidya-mayam tarhy
eva tan maya-visayatapannam avidya-paribhutam cety  ayuktam  iti  jivesvara-
vibhago ’vagatah.  tatas  ca  svarupa-samarthya-vailaksanyena  tad  dvitayam
mitho-vilaksana-svarupam evety agatam.
   If it is indeed true that the one undivided Brahman, whose very nature is
pure spirit, is the foundation of material illusion and  also  embodies  the
liberating force of knowledge, then it is  illogical  to  say  that  Brahman
falls under Maya’s influence and is  overcome  by  ignorance.  Thus  we  can
understand that the jiva and the Supreme Lord are separate  entities.  Since
both their identities and their capabilities are  different,  the  jiva  and
the Lord are essentially distinct.


   COMMENTARY
   The Jiva Is Not the Supreme Brahman
   Srila Jiva Gosvami has carefully analyzed Srila Vyasadeva’s  trance,  and
now, on the basis of  that  analysis,  he  presents  arguments  against  the
Mayavada theory of the absolute oneness of the Supreme  Soul  and  the  jiva
souls. The ideas of the Mayavadis are completely antagonistic to  devotional
service and are therefore one of the greatest obstacles on the path of  real
spiritual progress. Srila Raghunatha dasa Gosvami compared impersonalism  to
a tigress who devours one’s spiritual life. He said,  kathah  mukti-vyaghrya
na srnu kila sarvatma-gilanih: “My dear mind, never  listen  to  talk  about
liberation, which is like a tigress who swallows everything,  including  the
self” (Manah-siksa 4).
   Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu also gave a  stern  warning  about  the  Mayavada
philosophy to those who aspire to understand the Personality of  Godhead  in
truth. He said, mayavadi-bhasya sunile haya  sarva-nasa:  “Hearing  Mayavada
philosophy completely destroys one’s spiritual  life”  (Cc.  Madhya  6.169).
Ultimately, He said, because the  Mayavadis  describe  Absolute  Reality  as
featureless they are the greatest offenders against Sri Krsna,  the  Supreme
Lord.
   Sri Madhvacarya presented forceful refutations of the Mayavada theory  in
a similar vein. One of his most impressive efforts  in  this  line  was  his
Mayavada-khandanam. In this and other works he  exposed  the  way  Mayavadis
misuse grammatical analysis and employ faulty logic, which  they  resort  to
in their vain attempt to prove the absolute  nondifference  between  Brahman
and the jiva.
   In the same mood, Srila Jiva Gosvami will refute the Mayavada  theory  in
the next few  Texts  and  conclude  by  exhorting  his  readers  to  further
investigate the Mayavadis’ “unintelligible  concoctions.”  In  other  words,
Jiva Gosvami expects the followers of Sri Gauranga  Mahaprabhu  to  consider
it their duty to defeat the impersonalists’ word jugglery in  as  many  ways
as possible. When the Mayavadis are so thoroughly exposed that  not  one  of
the pillars supporting their errant doctrine is  left  standing,  then  only
fools will fall prey to their misleading ideas.
   The impersonalists headed by Sri Sankaracarya base their  tenets  on  the
Vedanta-sutra and the eleven principal  Upanisads,  and  they  also  try  to
support  their  arguments  with  statements  from  the  Bhagavad-gita.  Jiva
Gosvami contends, however, that their interpretations contradict what  Srila
Vyasadeva  experienced  in  trance,  which  is  narrated  in   the   Srimad-
Bhagavatam, the  essence  of  the  Upanisads,  the  Vedanta-sutra,  and  the
Puranas.
   Mayavadis claim that ultimate reality  is  nondual,  pure  consciousness,
without form or attributes. They try to  define  ultimate  reality  only  in
negative terms, and so they repeat the aphorism  neti  neti[7],  “Not  this,
not that.” To support their arguments they cite such Vedic  declarations  as
sarvam khalv idam brahma (“Indeed,  all  this  is  Brahman”;  Chandogya  Up.
3.14.1), ekam evadvitiyam (“Brahman is one  without  a  second”’;  Chandogya
Up. 6.2.1), vijïanam anandam brahma (“Brahman is consciousness  and  bliss”;
Brhad-aranyaka  Up.  3.9.28),  and  neha  nanasti  kiïcana  (“Ultimately  no
variety exists in this world”; Brhad-aranyaka Up. 4.4.19).
   But then to explain the obvious variety in this world, the Mayavadis  are
forced to introduce the idea of some beginningless entity  called  Maya,  or
illusion. The Mayavadis say that this  Maya  cannot  be  defined  as  either
existing or not exisiting. They further say that Maya has two  aspects—vidya
(knowledge) and avidya (ignorance). Somehow or other some  part  of  Brahman
comes in contact with Maya, and the result is illusion for that  portion  of
Brahman. Brahman contacts both  vidya  and  avidya.  When  the  totality  of
Brahman contacts vidya, then the personal Godhead, known  as  isvara,  comes
into being. And when small parts of Brahman contact avidya, they become  the
jivas.
   According to the Mayavada doctrine, the  difference  between  isvara  and
jiva is not intrinsic or  eternal;  it  is  due  only  to  upadhis,  or  the
apparent limitations superimposed on Brahman  by  Maya’s  vidya  and  avidya
potencies. When a jiva acquires spiritual knowledge and thus  removes  these
upadhis  from  himself,  he  realizes   himself   to   be   the   unlimited,
nonvariegated Brahman. This attainment is supposed to be the  perfection  of
spiritual life. In support of this concept, the Sankarites quote  the  Vedic
statement rte jïanan na muktih: “There is no liberation without knowledge.”
   A favorite analogy the Mayavadis use to  explain  how  unlimited  Brahman
becomes limited as the jivas is that of the sky and clay pots. Just  as  the
vast sky seems to become limited in a pot and is then known as “the  sky  in
the pot,” so the unlimited Brahman seems to become  limited  by  the  jivas’
subtle and gross material bodies. When a pot is broken there is no longer  a
distinction between the sky in  the  pot  and  the  all-pervading  sky,  and
similarly when a jiva’s false identity  is  dissolved  the  jiva  no  longer
appears  different  from  Brahman.  Actually,  the  Mayavadis  explain,  the
apparent distinction between the sky in the pot and  the  all-pervading  sky
did not really exist even when the pot was intact, and in the same  way  the
difference between the individual self  and  the  total  Supreme  is  always
illusory. The Advaita monists even see confirmation of all this  in  Srimad-
Bhagavatam, as in the final instructions to Pariksit  Maharaja  imparted  by
Sukadeva, the leader of all transcendentalists:
   ghate bhinne yathakasa akasah syad yatha pura
   evam dehe mrte jivo brahma sampadyate punah
“When a pot is broken, the portion of sky within  the  pot  remains  as  the
element sky, just as before. In the same way,  when  the  gross  and  subtle
bodies die, the living entity  within  again  becomes  the  Supreme”  (Bhag.
12.5.5). Later in the same set of instructions, Sukadeva also says,
   aham brahma param dhama brahmaham paramam param
   evam samiksann atmanam atmany adhaya niskale
“‘I am the Absolute Truth, the supreme abode, and that Absolute  Truth,  the
supreme destination, is I.’ Meditating like this, merge yourself  into  that
nameless universal self” (Bhag. 12.5.11).
   These  statements  of  course  need  proper  explanation,  but  when  the
Mayavadis explain them they do so without regard to the actual  context.  In
fact, only by taking them out of con
   TEXT can one translate them as shown above. In the fifty-second
   TEXT of the Tattva-sandarbha, Srila Jiva Gosvami will briefly discuss why
such verses seem  to  have  an  impersonal  slant,  and  in  Sri  Paramatma-
sandarbha, sections 72–84, he will provide a more detailed discussion.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami here begins  countering  the  Mayavada  philosophy  by
establishing the essential distinction between jiva and  isvara.  His  first
point is, as we have learned from the account of  Vyasadeva’s  trance,  that
Maya controls only the jiva and  not  the  Supreme  Lord.  Indeed,  Maya  is
dependent upon the Lord and completely controlled by Him. The  same  Brahman
cannot be the controller as well as the controlled,  because  ignorance  and
knowledge cannot exist simultaneously in the one undivided reality, just  as
light and darkness cannot occupy the same point in space.
   The jiva’s abilities and  qualities  are  different  from  those  of  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. This difference, moreover, is not a  product
of illusion. By constitution the jiva is atomic in  size,  and  thus  he  is
vulnerable to Maya’s  influence  when  he  disassociates  himself  from  the
Supreme Lord. But by surrendering to the Lord he can free himself  from  the
shackles of Maya. Srila Vyasa saw all this in His trance.
   In the next Text, Srila Jiva Gosvami states that the  difference  between
the jiva and the Lord is real and not just empirical.


===== TS.36 =====
NUMBER: 36
SOURCE LABEL: Text 36

TEXT 36
   na  copadhi-taratamya-maya-pariccheda-pratibimbatvadi-vyavasthaya   tayor
vibhagah syat.
   Also, the Mayavadis cannot explain this difference between the  jiva  and
the Lord simply as a division or reflection of Brahman into a  hierarchy  of
upadhis.


   COMMENTARY
   The Jiva Is Not Merely an Upadhi
   The Mayavada philosophers hold that there is  one  reality—the  formless,
indivisible,  non-variegated,  impersonal  Brahman—and  they  have   various
theories for explaining the apparent existence of jivas and isvara. The  two
theories mentioned in this section are the most  prevalent,  and  both  have
been expressed in several modified forms. According to the  pariccheda-vada,
the one  indivisible  Brahman  appears  divided  into  many  embodied  jivas
because of various upadhis, just as the one  great  sky  (mahakasa)  appears
divided by being contained in various pots (ghatakasa).
   This theory proposes that no  real  difference  exists  between  the  sky
inside a pot and the sky  outside.  The  distinction  is  assumed  only  for
practical purposes. Once the pot is  broken  and  the  apparent  distinction
removed, the sky inside the pot and the great sky are understood to be  one.
Similarly, the proponents of pariccheda-vada say,  there  is  so  difference
between the embodied jiva and Brahman.  The  jiva’s  limiting  adjunct,  his
subtle body, is actually a false covering superimposed on the jiva after  he
comes into contact  with  Maya’s  avidya  potency,  and  it  is  this  false
covering alone that makes him appear to be separate from Brahman. Thus  when
Brahman is limited by subtle bodies it becomes the jivas.  But  when  it  is
limited by vidya it is  called  isvara.  This  doctrine  of  separation  was
formulated by Vacaspati Misra, the ninth-century author of the Bhamati
   COMMENTARY  on Sankara’s Vedanta-sutra-bhasya.
   According to pratibimba-vada, when the  formless,  undivided  Brahman  is
reflected in the various subtle bodies made of  avidya,  it  appears  to  be
many, just as the one sun reflected in various receptacles of water  appears
to be many. In this analogy, the sun remains uninfluenced by  the  agitation
of the water in  which  it  is  reflected,  even  while  the  reflection  is
influenced. Similarly, Brahman is never influenced by the changes  that  its
reflections, the jivas, undergo. Indeed,  the  happiness  and  distress  the
jivas experience are only illusions resulting  from  their  conditioned,  or
reflected, state. When a jiva  frees  himself  from  illusion  and  achieves
liberation, he reverts  to  his  original  Brahman  consciousness.  This  is
another Mayavada version of how the jivas come into being.
   According to the proponents of pratibimba-vada,  the  same  Brahman  that
becomes the jivas when reflected in Maya’s avidya  potency  becomes  isvara,
the creator Godhead, when reflected in her vidya potency. By virtue of  this
contact with Maya, Brahman assumes  a  personal  but  temporary  form  that,
unlike the jiva, is  immune  to  Maya’s  influence.  Nonetheless,  Brahman’s
manifestation in the personal feature of isvara is the work of Maya  and  is
inferior to the all-pervading Brahman. The  pratibimba-vadis  say  that  all
the  incarnations  of  God   described   in   the   Vedic   literature   are
manifestations of isvara—the results  of  Brahman’s  combining  with  Maya’s
vidya potency. Like the jivas, such  personal  manifestations  of  God  have
subtle and gross bodies, but unlike the  jivas  They  neither  accept  their
bodies because of past karma  nor  are  bound  by  the  reactions  of  Their
activities. Thus jiva and isvara are distinct.
   The Mayavadis try  to  support  their  ideas  by  citing  scripture.  For
example, from the Suka-rahasya Upanisad  (2.12)  they  quote  the  statement
karyopadhir ayam jivah karanopadhir isvarah: “The jiva is a  reflection  [of
Brahman] in the antah-karana, or heart, and the isvara is  a  reflection  in
Maya.”[8]
   Also:  yatha  hy  ayam  jyotir  atma  vivasvan  apo  bhittva   bahudhaiko
’nugacchan upadhina kriyate bheda-rupo devah ksetresv evam  ajo  ’yam  atma.
“Just as the one effulgent sun appears to be many  when  reflected  in  many
pots of water, so the one unborn atma, Brahman, appears to  be  many  beings
when reflected in many bodies.”[9] (This
   TEXT is quoted by Baladeva Vidyabhusana in his Tattva-sandarbha
   COMMENTARY .)
   Some Advaita monists also cite  Srimad-Bhagavatam  in  support  of  their
pratibimba-vada and pariccheda-vada:
   na hi satyasya nanatvam avidvan yadi manyate
   nanatvam chidrayor yadvaj jyotisor vatayor iva
“This is certain: there is no variety in the Absolute Truth. If an  ignorant
person thinks there is, his understanding is just like thinking there  is  a
difference between the sky above and the sky in a pot, or  between  the  sun
and its reflection in water, or between the air outside  the  body  and  the
air inside”[10] (Bhag. 12.4.30).
   Srila Jiva Gosvami, following in Lord  Caitanya  Mahaprabhu’s  footsteps,
contends that Sri Vyasadeva’s  experience  in  trance  contradicts  both  of
these Mayavada doctrines—namely, pariccheda-vada and  pratibimba-vada.  This
contradiction  is  evident  from  the  analysis  Jiva  Gosvami  has  already
presented, but in the upcoming Texts  he  will  demonstrate  it  further  by
pointing out the specific defects in these doctrines.


===== TS.37 =====
NUMBER: 37
SOURCE LABEL: Text 37

TEXT 37
   tatra yady upadher anavidyakatvena  vastavatvam  tarhy  avisayasya  tasya
pariccheda-visayatvasambhavah. nirdharmakasya  vyapakasya  niravayavasya  ca
pratibimbatvayogo  ’pi  upadhi-sambandhabhavad  bimba-pratibimba-bhedabhavad
drsyatvabhavac ca.  upadhi-parichinnakasa-stha-jyotir-amsasyaiva  pratibimbo
drsyate na tv akasasya drsyatvabhavad eva.
   If we assume that these upadhis are empirically real  and  not  illusory,
still, because Brahman is not affected by anything, it cannot  be  delimited
by them. Moreover, Brahman can cast no reflection because it  is  devoid  of
attributes,  all-pervading,  and   indivisible.   Since   Brahman   has   no
attributes, it  can  have  no  relation  with  upadhis;  since  it  is  all-
pervading, it cannot be divided into a reflected object and its  reflection;
and since it is indivisible  and  uniform,  it  cannot  be  seen.  In  these
respects  Brahman  resembles  the  sky.:  Because  the  sky  is   invisible,
reflections are cast not by the sky itself but by limited luminous parts  of
the sky [namely the heavenly bodies].


   COMMENTARY
   Flaws in Pratibimba-vada and Pariccheda-vada
   In Advaita monism, existence (satta) is  understood  on  three  different
levels—pratibhasika  (merely  apparent  reality),   vyavaharika   (ordinary,
empirical  reality),  and  paramarthika  (absolute  reality).   Pratibhasika
existence is perceived in such states as dreams  and  illusions  but  ceases
when normal consciousness returns. One may, for example, mistake a rope  for
a snake in semidarkness, but this perception ceases  as  soon  as  light  is
shed on the rope. Therefore, the snake perceived in the rope  was  a  merely
apparent  reality,  or  pratibhasika-satta.  It  cannot  be  considered   an
empirical reality because it is private and temporary.
   According to the Mayavadis, empirical reality, vyavaharika-satta,  refers
to our perception of the material world in  ordinary  waking  consciousness.
Ultimate reality, paramarthika-satta, is  present  in  all  objects  of  the
material world, pervading them  as  the  blissful  source  of  all  manifest
varieties. In his Drg-drsya-viveka (20) Sripada Sankaracarya writes:
   asti bhati priyam rupam nama cety amsa-païcakam
   adya-trayam brahma-rupam jagad-rupam tato dvayam
“Objects  in  the  material  world  have   five   characteristics—existence,
perceivability, attractiveness, form, and name. Of these,  the  first  three
belong to Brahman and the others to the world.” The  last  two  items,  form
and name, are products of  Maya  and  thus  constitute  only  the  empirical
reality; they do not exist on the absolute level. They are manifest only  as
long as one has not realized Brahman. The other three are Brahman itself  as
perceived in empirical reality.
   The Mayavadis claim that the paramarthika-satta, or absolute reality,  is
impersonal Brahman,  which,  unlike  the  other  two  realities,  cannot  be
negated by experience and scriptural authority. Just as  dreams  cease  when
one wakes, the material world will cease to exist when one  becomes  Brahman
realized. There is no  higher  reality  than  absolute  Brahman,  no  higher
existence that can negate  the  real  existence  of  Brahman  in  the  past,
present, or  future.  On  the  level  of  Brahman  existence,  there  is  no
distinction between knowledge, the knower, and the object of knowledge.  All
three fuse into one absolute reality. The two lower realities,  pratibhasika
and vyavaharika, are not perceived on this level of consciousness.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami  refutes  both  the  pariccheda-vada  (the  theory  of
division) and the pratibimba-vada (the theory of reflection) by  considering
the Sankarites’ explanation of the upadhis covering Brahman as  features  of
the two lower realities: These upadhis can never  be  real  aspects  of  the
absolute reality, since that would introduce duality on the  nondual  plane.
In the case of pariccheda-vada, the upadhis can be either empirical  reality
(anavidyaka) or apparent reality (avidyaka). Srila Jiva  Gosvami  shows  the
fault in both of these alternatives.
   If the upadhis are empirically real, Brahman still cannot be  limited  by
them because pure Brahman is unconditioned by anything  else,  empirical  or
otherwise. In the Bhagavad-gita (13.13) Lord Sri Krsna confirms this:
   jïeyam yat tat pravaksyami yaj jïatvamrtam asnute
   anadi mat-param brahma na sat tan nasad ucyate
“I shall now  explain  the  knowable,  knowing  which  you  will  taste  the
eternal. Brahman, the supreme spirit, beginningless and subordinate  to  Me,
lies beyond the cause and effect of this material world.”  Thus  no  upadhis
can limit Brahman. But in the  opinion  of  Sankaracarya,  this  Gita  verse
says, “I shall tell you that which  has  to  be  known,  knowing  which  one
attains immortality; it is the  beginningless,  supreme  Brahman,  which  is
said to be neither being nor nonbeing.” In commenting on this verse  Sankara
writes:
   idam tu jïeyam atindriyatvena sabdaika-pramana-gamyatvan  na  ghatadi-vad
ubhaya-buddhy-anugata-pratyaya-visayam ity ato na san na  asad  ity  ucyate.
yat tv uktam viruddham ucyate jïeyam tan na sat tan na asad ucyate  iti.  na
viruddham. “anyad eva tad viditad atho aviditad adhi” iti srute.
   “But this knowable Brahman, being beyond the reach of the senses, can  be
understood only by means  of  hearing  revealed  knowledge  from  scripture.
Therefore, unlike the clay pot, etc., it can never be said to exist  or  not
exist, and thus it can never be called sat or asat.
   “Objection: But what you said about Brahman, the object of knowledge—that
it is neither existent nor nonexistent—is contradictory.
   “Answer: No, it is not, because the  sruti  states:  ‘That  [Brahman]  is
different from the known and from the  unknown,  for  it  is  beyond  both’”
(Kena Up. 1.3).
   So according to the Mayavadis’  own  version,  Brahman  is  beyond  sense
perception, beyond empirical existence  and  nonexistence.  Such  being  the
case, if the upadhis of Brahman are empirically real they  can  never  limit
the undivided and indivisible Brahman and produce the jivas.  Therefore  the
Vedas  say,  agrhyo  na  grhyate:  “The  untouchable  [Brahman]  cannot   be
perceived” (Brhad-aranyaka Up. 9.26). Brahman being neither  pierceable  nor
divisible, it cannot be broken or delimited into jivas  the  way  one  might
break a large stone into pebbles.
   If we hypothetically grant that  the  upadhis  can  divide  Brahman  into
jivas, then in that case neither the jivas  nor  Brahman  itself  should  be
called eternal.  But  the  Bhagavad-gita,  which  the  Mayavadis  accept  as
authoritative, describes both the jiva and Brahman as  eternal.  In  Chapter
Thirteen,
   TEXT 20, Lord Krsna says that the jiva is anadi, beginningless. The  same
is stated in texts 20–24 of the Second Chapter.
   Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana states  that  even  if  the  above  point  is
overlooked, other inconsistencies abound in  the  Mayavada  conception:  The
jivas and isvara move from  one  place  to  another,  but  Brahman  is  all-
pervading.  Somehow  portions  of  Brahman  become  limited  by  upadhis  to
manifest as the jivas. When a given jiva moves from one  place  to  another,
either Brahman also moves along with  it  or  it  does  not.  But  Brahman’s
moving from place to place is impossible, because when  something  moves  it
leaves one location and then occupies another, where it was  absent  before.
It is absurd to propose this situation for Brahman, since Brahman is  always
present everywhere.
   On the other hand, if Brahman does not  move  with  the  jivas,  we  must
assume that when a jiva is moving from place to place its upadhi  constantly
delimits new portions of Brahman, simultaneously  releasing  the  previously
delimited portions. This reduces Brahman, the absolute reality, to a toy  in
the hands of its upadhis, a proposal that is also absurd.
   If it is instead proposed that all of Brahman is grasped by its  upadhis,
the problem of movement can be solved, but then  there  remains  no  Brahman
free  from  upadhis,  meaning  that  there  is  no  chance  for  the  jivas’
liberation or for useful discussion of philosophy; all  of  existence  would
consist of the deluded Brahman, and there would be no  liberated  domain  to
aspire for.
   If it is countered that Brahman is not the basis for its upadhis and thus
they can move  independently  of  Brahman,  this  means  that  even  at  the
liberated level these independent upadhis will continue to exist.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami concludes that the interpretation  of  pariccheda-vada
in terms of Brahman’s upadhis being empirically real is invalid.
   He then goes on to refute  pratibimba-vada,  the  theory  of  reflection.
Brahman, Srila Jiva states, can  cast  no  reflection  in  its  upadhis,  or
subtle bodies of material  existence,  because  Brahman  is  devoid  of  all
attributes. Only an object possessing attributes like  form  and  color  can
have a reflection. If an object is invisible, how can  it  be  reflected  in
anything?
   If it is countered that the sky, although invisible, casts  a  reflection
in water, Jiva Gosvami replies that it is in fact the stars and  planets  in
the sky that cast reflections in water, not  the  sky  itself.  If  the  sky
could cast a reflection, then the wind would  also  be  able  to  cast  one,
because air is a grosser material element  than  sky.  According  to  modern
science, the bluish  background  seen  behind  the  visible  bodies  in  the
firmament is an optical illusion created by the refracted  sunlight  passing
through the atmosphere. No concrete, underlying object is there  to  cast  a
reflection, only  the  invisible  firmament.  Hence  the  analogy  comparing
Brahman to the sky being reflected in water is inappropriate here.
   Furthermore, we have already shown  that,  according  to  the  Mayavadis,
Brahman is beyond empirical existence and nonexistence and thus also  beyond
sensory perception. It is foolish to then propose that Brahman  reflects  as
the jivas. But Srila Jiva Gosvami is  willing  to  grant  the  opposition  a
respite and hypothetically accept their premise that Brahman can reflect  in
upadhis, in  which  case  all-pervading  Brahman  must  also  exist  in  the
upadhis, in which it supposedly  reflects.  But  if  the  reflected  object,
Brahman, is already present in the reflecting medium, the upadhis, how  will
it reflect there? As a mirror cannot reflect in itself,  so  Brahman  cannot
reflect in itself. Even if somehow it manages  to  reflect  in  itself,  how
will it be possible to distinguish the reflected Brahman from  the  original
Brahman already  present  in  the  upadhis?  The  two  will  be  coincident,
allowing no basis for  distinguishing  one  from  the  other.  How  can  the
reflected Brahman be singled out to be termed jiva and made to suffer?  What
was His offense? Why is it that the reflected Brahman  becomes  affected  by
upadhis and  not  the  original  Brahman,  although  the  reflection  is  no
different from the original?
   The Mayavadis have also told us  that  Brahman  has  no  internal  parts:
niskalam niskriyam santam. “Brahman  contains  no  limbs  or  parts.  It  is
inactive and peaceful” (Svetasvatara Up. 6.79). But a formless,  indivisible
object cannot have a relation with any upadhi, real or imaginary,  and  thus
it cannot reflect in any medium.
   In response to this contention, the Advaita monists cite the analogy of a
clear crystal that appears red when placed in front of a  red  flower.  Just
as the red color, which is formless and partless, casts  its  reflection  on
the crystal, so it is possible for Brahman to be reflected in  its  upadhis.
But this is a faulty argument. The red color in this analogy belongs to  the
flower, which projects its  image  through  the  crystal,  although  in  the
crystal we perceive only the flower’s color. The color exists simply as  the
flower’s attribute  and  cannot  sustain  itself  independently.  A  flower,
moreover, has shape, parts, and attributes. In sum, neither  the  color  nor
the flower compares adequately to Brahman. Therefore, like  the  analogy  of
the reflected sky, this analogy has also been applied incongruously  by  the
Mayavadis.
   The sruti says, asango  hy  ayam  purusah:  “Brahman  is  free  from  any
relation or association”  (Brhad-aranyaka  Up.  4.3.15).  Therefore  Brahman
cannot engage in any relationship with a reflecting  medium.  The  Mayavadis
interpret the word asanga here as meaning “devoid of real  relations.”  This
implies that Brahman can have nonreal relations or associations, created  by
Maya, but we have already shown that a formless Brahman has  no  ability  to
manifest a reflection in an  empirically  real  medium  or  have  any  other
relation with such a medium, and this impossibility is  even  more  definite
with respect to unreal relations with unreal mediums.  The  Prasna  Upanisad
(4.10) confirms this when it states, tad acchayam asariram  alohitam:  “That
Brahman casts no shadow, has  no  body,  and  is  colorless.”  We  can  thus
conclude that upadhis—whether real or unreal—can never impose themselves  on
pure Brahman. They affect only the deluded jivas.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami presents  more  arguments  against  the  Mayavada
doctrine, hypothetically considering Brahman’s upadhis as real.


===== TS.38 =====
NUMBER: 38
SOURCE LABEL: Text 38

TEXT 38
   tatha vastava-paricchedadau sati samanadhikaranya-jïana-matrena  na  tat-
tyagas ca bhavet. tat-padartha-prabhavas tatra karanam iti ced  asmakam  eva
matam sammatam.
   Moreover, if there  were  empirically  real  upadhis  delimiting  Brahman
(pariccheda) or acting as the  medium  of  its  reflection  (pratibimba),  a
person could not escape from them simply by  knowing  he  is  one  with  the
Supreme in essence. And if the Advaita monists  propose  that  freedom  from
upadhis is due to the influence of the supreme entity, who  is  called  tat,
then they agree with us!


   COMMENTARY
   Refutations of Pratibimba-vada and Pariccheda-vada
   Srila Jiva Gosvami here exposes further  complications  that  arise  from
accepting  Brahman’s  upadhis  as  empirically  real.  The  Advaita  monists
believe that a jiva can become free from bondage to his upadhis by  becoming
educated through the srutis.  This  is  the  idea  of  the  following  sruti
statements:
   Tat tvam asi: “Thou art that” (Chandogya Up. 6.8.7).
   Tad atmanam eva vedaham brahmasmi: “It  knew  Itself:  ‘’I  am  Brahman’”
(Brhad-aranyaka Up. 1.4.10).
   Tat tvam asy-adi-vakyebhyah  jïanam  moksasya  sadhanam:  “The  means  to
liberation is knowledge arising  from  dictums  such  as  ‘Thou  art  that’”
(Brhan-naradiya Pur. 35.68).
   Brahma veda  brahmaiva  bhavati:  “He  who  knows  that  Brahman  becomes
Brahman” (Mundaka Up. 3.2.9).
   Tarati  sokam  atma-vit:  “The  knower  of  the  Self  transcends  grief”
(Chandogya Up. 7.1.3).
   Thus, with the apparent support of Vedic scripture, the  Mayavada  school
claims that liberation is achieved  through  knowledge.  Indeed,  the  sruti
says, tam eva viditva ati mrtyum eti/ nanyah pantha vidyate  ’yanaya:  “Only
by knowing that [Brahman] can one transcend death; there is no other way  to
cross over” (Svetasvatara Up. 3.8). And in  the  Bhagavad-gita  (4.37)  Lord
Krsna says:
   yathaidamsi samiddho ’gnir bhasma-sat kurute ’rjuna
   jïanagnih sarva-karmani bhasma-sat kurute tatha
“As a blazing fire turns firewood to ashes, O Arjuna, so does  the  fire  of
knowledge burn to ashes all reactions to material activities.” And again  in
the fourth chapter, verses 38 and 39, the Lord says, na hi  jïanena  sadrsam
pavitram iha vidyate: “Nothing is as purifying  as  knowledge”;  and  jïanam
labdhva param santim acirenadhigacchati: “Having  attained  this  knowledge,
one quickly attains the supreme peace.”
   In effect, the Mayavadis think the jiva is like a rich man’s  infant  son
who has gotten lost in a busy public place and is then found by a poor  man.
As a result of this misfortune, compounded by the  son’s  ignorance  of  his
true identity, the baby grows up in a humble setting as  the  child  of  the
poor man. Later  the  child  may  be  recognized  by  one  of  his  father's
servants. As soon as the boy comes to realize he is the  son  of  a  wealthy
man, all his poverty evaporates. He does not have to toil hard  to  get  rid
of this poverty. In fact, he was never really poor, just ignorant, and  thus
simply coming to a proper understanding of his real identity was  sufficient
to reverse the situation.
   Another example: A person forgets that he put his watch in his pocket and
searches for hours, but without any luck. Finally, a friend comes along  and
sees the watch strap sticking out of his pocket and tells him,  “Your  watch
is in your pocket.” At once the person has the  watch  and  his  anxiety  is
gone. Knowledge alone was sufficient to relieve his distress.
   Similarly, the Mayavadis say, the jiva is nothing but deluded Brahman. As
soon as he realizes this by properly  hearing  the  Vedic  instructions,  he
becomes liberated. He then understands that  Brahman  is  not  distant  from
him, for in fact he himself is Brahman. His  only  obstacle  was  ignorance,
which hearing the Vedas has now removed. Of course, for the  process  to  be
effective one’s heart must be pure,  and  to  achieve  this  purity  Sripada
Sankaracarya  recommends  the  sadhana-catustaya,  or  “fourfold  practice,”
consisting  of  discrimination,  dispassion,  “the  six  achievements,”  and
eagerness for liberation.
   According  to  Sankara,  one  of  the  four  maha-vakyas,  or   essential
statements of all Vedic  instructions,  is  tat  tvam  asi:  “You  are  that
[Brahman].” This statement underlines the oneness of the jiva with  Brahman.
But, we have to ask, since Brahman is all-pervading  and  all-knowing  while
the jiva is atomic and limited in knowledge, how can they be  the  same?  To
this the Mayavadis reply that tat tvam asi should not be understood  in  its
primary, literal sense but only in a secondary sense. One can recognize  the
actual oneness between the jiva  and  Brahman  when  one  puts  aside  their
opposing qualities—omnipresence  and  omniscience  versus  atomic  size  and
limited   knowledge—and   recognizes   only   their   mutual   quality    of
consciousness. This process is called  bhaga-tyaga-laksana,  or  applying  a
metaphorical meaning to a phrase  by  avoiding  part  of  a  word’s  literal
meaning or some of  its  qualifications.  Thus  one  can  realize  the  true
oneness between Brahman and jiva only when one puts aside  the  upadhi  that
limits Brahman into becoming a jiva. To help in this  realization  the  guru
instructs the disciple, “You are that.” Since the  sruti  statements  cannot
be meaningless, Sankara contends, this is the only  way  to  understand  the
maha-vakya.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami answers this whole argument by pointing out that  even
when a jiva is absorbed in hearing the Vedic sound conveying  the  knowledge
that he is one  with  Brahman,  the  upadhi  covering  the  jiva,  which  is
empirically real, will not magically dissolve. A man bound  by  chains  will
not become free just by meditating that his fetters are cut. A  rabbit  will
not turn into an elephant just by meditating, “I am an  elephant,  I  am  an
elephant.” Such achievements would be possible  only  if  the  upadhis  were
merely apparent. An intoxicated office clerk may think he is  the  President
of the United States, but when he becomes sober he understands he  is  still
just an office clerk. If the upadhis covering Brahman are real, the task  of
removing them is not so easy. Mere knowledge is not sufficient  to  liberate
the jiva from Maya.
   If knowledge alone were actually sufficient for liberation,  why  do  the
scriptures recommend various austerities, penances, and  rituals  for  self-
purification? The Mayavadis can only say that these  are  preliminary  steps
for purifying the heart, for qualifying one to  understand  the  meaning  of
the srutis’ maha-vakyas.
   But according to the sastras, knowledge (vidya)  and  ignorance  (avidya)
are both products of Maya. So even if a jiva, by studying Vedic texts,  gets
rid of his avidya with the help of vidya, he will still be bound  by  vidya.
How will he do away with this other upadhi, vidya? Until  he  is  free  from
all upadhis he cannot realize  Brahman,  which  is  beyond  both  vidya  and
avidya. Lord Krsna discusses this point with Uddhava in the  Eleventh  Canto
of the Bhagavatam (11.11.3):
vidyavidye mama tanu viddhy uddhava saririnam
moksa-bandha-kari adye mayaya me vinirmite
“O Uddhava, both knowledge  and  ignorance,  being  products  of  Maya,  are
expansions of My potency. Both knowledge and  ignorance  are  beginningless,
and they perpetually  award  living  beings  with  liberation  and  bondage,
respectively.” Here the Lord explicitly states that vidya is also a  product
of Maya. When He says that vidya gives liberation, He  does  not  mean  that
vidya alone can grant it, because no one can become free from  Maya  without
surrendering to the Supreme Lord. He emphatically declares  this  to  Arjuna
in the Bhagavad-gita (7.14):
daivi hy esa guna-mayi mama maya duratyaya
mam eva ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te
“This divine energy of Mine—Maya, consisting of the three modes of  material
nature—is difficult to overcome. Only those who  have  surrendered  unto  Me
can easily cross beyond it.”
   The term vidya means  “knowledge”  and  also  “devotion.”  In  Upanisadic
statements such as tam eva viditva ati mrtyum eti, the word viditva  (“after
knowing”)  really  means  “by  being  devoted  to  Him,  fully  knowing  His
essence”; it does not mean having knowledge  without  devotion.  Lord  Krsna
confirms this in the Bhagavad-gita (4.9):
janma karma ca me divyam evam yo vetti tattvatah
tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti so ’rjuna
“One who knows in truth the  transcendental  nature  of  My  appearance  and
activities does not, upon leaving the body, take his  birth  again  in  this
material world, but attains My eternal  abode,  O  Arjuna.”  Here  the  same
root, vid (“to know”), is being used, and in this con
TEXT it means “knowing with devotion.”
   Material knowledge is a feature of Maya, whereas transcendental knowledge
about the Lord is manifested by the illuminating power of bhakti, an  aspect
of the Supreme Lord’s internal potency. Spiritual knowledge  is  inseparable
from  bhakti.  The  process  of  hearing—or   in   other   words   receiving
knowledge—is in fact listed first among the  nine  processes  of  devotional
service. A passage from the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad (4.4.21) bears  out  our
conclusion that vidya indicates knowledge  with  devotion:  vijïaya  prajïam
kurvita. “After knowing, one should practice wisdom.”  Here  the  word  used
for wisdom—prajïa—conveys the same meaning as vidya,  and  so  the  sentence
indicates, “After knowing Him, one should practice devotion.” Also,  in  the
Bhagavad-gita (9.2)  the  Lord  says,  raja-vidya,  “This  is  the  king  of
knowledge.” From the con
   TEXT it is evident that here vidya means “devotional service.” Thus it is
devotional service and not mere knowledge that cuts the bonds  of  Maya,  as
stated  in  Bhagavad-gita  7.14  and  confirmed  later,   in   Bhagavad-gita
11.53–54:
naham vedair na tapasa na danena na cejyaya
sakya evam-vidho drastum drstavan asi mam yatha

bhaktya tv ananyaya sakya aham evam-vidho ’rjuna
jïatum drastum ca tattvena pravestum ca parantapa
“[Lord  Krsna  said  to  Arjuna:]  ‘The  form  you  are  seeing  with   your
transcendental eyes cannot be understood simply by studying the  Vedas,  nor
by undergoing serious penances, nor by charity, nor by worship.  It  is  not
by these means that one can see  Me  as  I  am.  My  dear  Arjuna,  only  by
undivided devotional service can I be understood as I  am,  standing  before
you, and can thus be seen directly. Only in this way can you enter into  the
mysteries of My understanding.”
   If the Mayavadis respond by suggesting that it is possible for  the  jiva
to remove all upadhis and become Brahman by the mercy  of  the  all-powerful
and benign Brahman, Srila Jiva Gosvami is glad to accept  this  idea,  since
it amounts to surrendering to the Vaisnava view. The Advaita monists  insist
that Brahman is devoid of all attributes and potencies,  but  if  that  same
Brahman is now required to  bless  the  jiva,  then  it  has  to  have  some
potency, namely mercy. By allowing featureless Brahman to have  any  potency
at all, the Mayavadis conform to the Vaisnava definition of Para-brahman  as
Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of  Godhead.  In  that  case,  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami says, asmakam  eva  mata-sammatam,  “Their  view  then  agrees  with
ours.” In the Bhagavat-sandarbha Srila Jiva Gosvami  will  prove  that  even
for Brahman realization one must take shelter of the Supreme Lord.
   Next, Srila Jiva Gosvami exposes the fallacies of the second alternative,
that Brahman’s upadhis are unreal.


                              TATTVA SANDARBHA


                            BY SRILA JIVA GOSWAMI


                                  [PART 7]


===== TS.39 =====
NUMBER: 39
SOURCE LABEL: Text 39

TEXT 39
   upadher avidyakatve tu  tatra  tat-paricchinnatvader  apy  aghatamanatvad
avidyakatvam eveti ghatakasadisu  vastavopadhi-maya-tad-darsanaya  na  tesam
avastava-svapna-drstantopajivinam siddhantah sidhyati  ghatamanaghatamanayoh
sangateh kartum asakyatvat. tatas ca tesam tat tat  sarvam  avidya-vilasitam
eveti svarupam apraptena tena tena tad tad vyavasthapayitum asakyam.
   Conversely, if the upadhis  are  only  apparently  real,  then  Brahman’s
delimitation  (pariccheda)  and  reflection  (pratibimba)  are   also   only
apparently real, since these processes would not in fact occur.  Because  in
this case the Mayavadis’ doctrine would  be  based  on  the  analogy  of  an
unreal dream state, such analogies as that of the pot  and  the  sky,  which
involve real upadhis, cannot serve to establish it. No  proper  analogy  can
be drawn between something that exists and something that  does  not  exist.
Therefore the Mayavadis’ theories of division  and  reflection  are  nothing
but the  play  of  illusion,  unprovable  by  their  faulty  application  of
analogies.


   COMMENTARY
   Further Refutations of Pratibimba-vada and Pariccheda-vada
   In previous Texts, Srila Jiva Gosvami has shown that if Brahman’s upadhis
are empirically real one cannot  satisfactorily  explain  the  existence  of
either the jivas or the isvara. Now he will consider the Sankarites’  second
option, that Brahman’s upadhis are only apparent. In this
   TEXT the upadhis are called avidyaka, or “illusory,” a specific reference
to pratibhasika reality as defined in Mayavada theory. In this con
   TEXT  the  Sankarites  do  not  intend  “illusory”  to  mean   altogether
nonexistent, for nonexistence can never give rise to either the jiva or  the
isvara. Rather, they say, Brahman’s upadhis  are  “illusory”  in  the  sense
that they exist on neither the empirical nor the absolute  level.  They  are
an  intangible,  apparent  reality,  akin  to  dreams,  misperceptions,  and
hallucinations.
   The objects one sees in dreams,  misperceptions,  or  hallucinations  are
intangible. In a dream one may eat  a  big  feast,  for  example,  but  upon
waking up one will still feel hungry; the  feast  appears  real  only  while
dreaming. Similarly intangible are misperceived or  imagined  objects,  such
as a “snake” that is in fact a rope; fear of the snake will persist only  as
long as the misperception or hallucination continues. This kind of  illusory
reality (pratibhasika-satta) is inferior  to  the  empirical  world  and  to
absolute reality.  Nonetheless,  the  Mayavadis  posit  that  such  apparent
upadhis can cause Brahman to take on the characteristics of  jivas  and  the
isvara.
   The first step in refuting this erroneous theory is to point out that  an
effect is always dependent on its cause  and  that  specific  effects  arise
from specific causes. For example, one cannot  make  water  taste  sweet  by
adding salt. It follows, therefore, that if the upadhis imposed  on  Brahman
are only  apparent  realities  they  cannot  produce  empirical  reality.  A
daydream may be a pleasant reverie, but no one gains  any  real  benefit  by
imagining he has been crowned emperor of the world. Instead,  as  he  whiles
away the time the daydreamer  may  lose  an  opportunity  for  gaining  some
practical benefit in the real world. However much he  dreams,  his  apparent
reality will never become empirically real.
   In the con
   TEXT of discussing real upadhis, Srila Jiva Gosvami has  already  refuted
the  two  analogies  the  Mayavadis  use  to  explain  pariccheda-vada   and
pratibimba-vada—the analogy of the sun  reflecting  in  many  waterpots  and
that of the sky becoming delimited  by  a  pot.  These  analogies  are  also
inappropriate here. The Mayavadis may justifiably  presume  the  sky  to  be
empirically real and thus delimitable by  such  an  upadhi  as  a  pot.  But
Brahman is neither empirical not divisible, and therefore it  is  impossible
for empirical upadhis to delimit it. If any delimitation of Brahman  can  be
reconciled with  Brahman’s  transcendental  nature,  such  delimitation  can
occur only on the level of mere appearance, not in empirical  reality.  Such
a pratibhasika delimitation, unreal in the empirical sense,  will  not  help
explain how the jivas and the  isvara  come  into  being  on  the  empirical
plane. This leaves no consistent explanation of  how  indivisible,  formless
Brahman can be divided into the jivas and the isvara by either empirical  or
merely apparent upadhis.
   A good analogy must be as similar as possible to what it illustrates. The
greater the similarity, the stronger the analogy. But  the  analogy  of  the
sky and the pot is not similar enough to the situation the Mayavadis try  to
apply it to: while the sky and Brahman are similar, the  sky’s  upadhi,  the
pot, is empirical, while Brahman’s upadhis must be merely apparent.
   The impersonalists compare this world to a dream in  order  to  show  its
illusory nature and to demonstrate that the world  does  not  really  exist.
But it is unjustifiable to equate the dream world  (apparent  reality)  with
the external world (empirical reality) in order to  reach  this  conclusion.
If a person commits murder in a dream he is not punished for it, but in  the
phenomenal world he risks punishment for such an act. So it is  improper  to
say that the world is just a dream. Sin and piety, which pollute  or  purify
the heart of an actor, are not applicable to acts done in dreams; they  give
their bitter and sweet fruits only in the phenomenal world. The  analogy  of
a dream, therefore, is not adequate for explaining  the  appearance  of  the
material world from Brahman. The Vedic scriptures present the dream  analogy
only to illustrate the temporary nature of this world, with  a  view  toward
inspiring a sense of detachment from materialism in those desiring  to  walk
the path of transcendence.
   The Mayavadis’ only other alternative is to assign Brahman  to  empirical
(vyavaharika) reality by placing it in the same class as the sky,  to  which
the Vedas compare it. But that leaves us with no absolute reality, in  which
case the whole idea becomes  absurd  because,  logically,  absolute  reality
must exist, and the Vedas and numerous saintly persons confirm this.
   Thus all these arguments fail to establish the  doctrines  of  pariccheda
and pratibimba, which are thus left as nothing more  than  mental  exercises
for impersonal speculators. They provide no sound explanation  of  how  pure
Brahman, by adulteration with upadhis, manifests as many, namely  as  isvara
and the jivas.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami offers still more refutations of impersonalism in  the
next Text.


===== TS.40 =====
NUMBER: 40
SOURCE LABEL: Text 40

TEXT 40
   iti brahmavidyayoh paryavasane sati yad eva  brahma  cin-matratvenavidya-
yogasyatyantabhavaspadatatvac chuddham  tad  eva  tad-yogad  asuddhya  jivah
punas tad eva jivavidya-kalpita-mayasrayatvad isvaras tad eva  ca  tan-maya-
visayatvaj jiva iti virodhas tad-avastha eva syat. tatra ca  suddhayam  city
avidya tad-avidya-kalpitopadhau tasyam isvarakhyayam  vidyeti  tatha  vidya-
vatte ’pi mayikatvam ity asamaïjasa ca kalpana syad ity-ady anusandheyam.
   In this way, by basing their ideas  on  Brahman  and  avidya  alone,  the
Mayavadis contradict  themselves  when  they  say  that  the  one  undivided
Brahman, pure by  virtue  of  being  unadulterated  consciousness  and  thus
altogether free  from  contact  with  avidya,  is  nonetheless  polluted  by
contacting avidya and thus becomes the jiva. Then again, say the  Mayavadis,
that same Brahman becomes the personal Godhead when He serves as  the  basis
of Maya, the illusion concocted  from  the  jiva’s  avidya.  And  under  the
influence of Maya, Brahman supposedly once more becomes the  jiva.  Here  we
have avidya within the pure spiritual  being  (Brahman),  vidya  within  the
upadhi called God, who is concocted by that avidya, and an  illusory  status
of that same Godhead, who is the proprietor of vidya.  We  should  carefully
study  how  these  and  other  similarly  manufactured  ideas   are   simply
incoherent.


   COMMENTARY
   Inconsistencies in Advaita Monism
   In the previous Texts  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  has  refuted  the  two  main
theories of Advaita monism, pariccheda-vada and pratibimba-vada.  He  showed
that neither of these consistently explains  the  empirical  world  and  the
presence of the jivas and God within it. Now Srila Jiva Gosvami  points  out
in further detail the fallacies in these theories. He argues  that  even  if
we  accept  either  the  pariccheda-vada  or  the   pratibimba-vada   as   a
description of how Brahman becomes divided into the many  jivas,  still  the
contradiction  between  Brahman’s  perfection  and  the  superimposition  of
avidya will remain unresolved.
   How can Brahman, which is indivisible pure consciousness,  have  portions
that fall under the rule of Maya and think themselves jivas?  Knowledge  and
delusion cannot share the same location, just as light and  darkness  cannot
both be present in  exactly  the  same  place.  Being  indivisible,  Brahman
cannot become fragmented to  manifest  the  jivas.  Moreover,  the  absolute
existence cannot include Maya (avidya), but only Brahman alone. For Maya  to
be involved with Brahman, either Brahman would have  to  degrade  itself  to
Maya’s empirical level so it could be adulterated by upadhis, or  else  Maya
would have to elevate herself to the absolute plane of Brahman so  that  she
could influence it. The first of these alternatives  is  impossible  because
Brahman is without attributes and  cannot  change.  The  second  alternative
amounts to dualism, because then Maya and Brahman would  have  equal  status
on the plane of absolute reality. This, of  course,  contradicts  the  first
principles of Advaita monism.
   Under the pressure of these arguments,  the  impersonalists  may  try  to
placate us with the claim that the vital issue at hand is not precisely  how
the jiva came under the  influence  of  Maya  but  simply  that  he  is  now
suffering in illusion. The house of material existence is now  on  fire;  we
do not have time to search out Maya’s origin but should try  to  escape  the
fire quickly before it devours us, before we lose the opportunity  of  human
life.
   Even if we grant this point, the Mayavadis still must  convince  us  that
the end they want  us  to  seek,  impersonal  liberation,  is  in  our  best
interest. This they cannot do. Our house may be on fire,  but  it  does  not
follow that we should panic and jump out the first available window  to  our
certain death.
   As Srila Jiva Gosvami  indicates  here,  the  Mayavadis  say  that  after
Brahman comes under the influence of avidya He is  called  jiva.  Then  this
jiva creates Maya by his  imagination.  A  portion  of  Brahman  next  gives
shelter to Maya and becomes known as isvara, or the Supreme Lord. From  that
point on Maya follows isvara’s  dictates  and  controls  the  jiva,  who  is
Brahman covered by Maya. So isvara is the basis of Maya,  and  the  jiva  is
her visaya, or object of action.
   This is self-contradictory. This explanation is plagued with the  logical
fault called  anyonyasraya-dosa,  or  “the  defect  of  mutual  dependence”:
Maya’s existence  supposedly  originates  from  the  jiva,  and  the  jiva’s
existence also originates from Maya. This means that without Maya  there  is
no jiva and without jiva there is no Maya. In addition, a  part  of  Brahman
supposedly  becomes  isvara  by  contacting  Maya,  but  then  Maya  becomes
subordinate to  this  isvara.  In  this  view  even  God  cannot  come  into
existence without the involvement of  the  finite  living  beings,  who  are
themselves  dependent  manifestations  of  Maya.  So  ultimately  isvara  is
dependent on Maya for His existence.
   Another   absurdity   in   the   pariccheda-vada   and    pratibimba-vada
presentations is the claim that Maya has two features—vidya and avidya.  The
upadhi delimiting Brahman as isvara  is  supposedly  Maya’s  vidya  portion,
which is predominantly in the mode of goodness, while the  upadhis  limiting
Brahman as the jivas constitute her avidya portion. In this way,  isvara  is
the basis of the  jivas’  illusion  despite  His  being  the  embodiment  of
perfect knowledge, but the Mayavadis cannot explain how such a  division  of
Maya into vidya and avidya comes into existence.  Certainly  Brahman,  being
devoid of qualities, cannot create this division.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami advises us to study other inconsistencies  like  these
in Mayavada philosophy.  For  example,  we  should  consider  the  following
questions: If originally only featureless Brahman and nothing  else  exists,
where does avidya come from? Or, if avidya can bind Brahman, isn’t  it  more
powerful than Brahman? The  Mayavadis  compare  Brahman  to  a  spider  that
weaves its own web and somehow gets bound by it, but this  analogy  presents
Brahman  as  possessing  attributes  and  potencies,   revealing   a   tacit
acceptance of the Vaisnava dualistic understanding.
   We should also consider the following conundrums: (1)  Since  Brahman  is
unlimited and devoid of parts, it cannot possibly  cast  a  reflection.  (2)
Brahman is described as pure awareness, but in order to function,  awareness
needs an object apart from itself. There is no meaning to knowledge  without
a known object. And when there is an object, there is  the  multiplicity  of
knower, knowledge, and known. (3)  The  very  fact  of  Brahman’s  existence
proves that it is potent, because anything that exists necessarily has  some
kind of energy or attribute. Thus there is duality between Brahman  and  its
potencies or attributes.
   From  Sankhya  philosophy  we  understand  that  the  primeval   pradhana
generates the mahat-tattva,  which  then  gives  rise  to  false  ego.  Now,
suppose we grant that, as the Mayavadis say, a jiva can dissolve  his  false
ego by cultivating spiritual knowledge. But  even  if  one  does  this,  the
other two basic elements of material nature—mahat-tattva  and  pradhana—will
remain undissolved. How will the egoless  jiva  transcend  the  mahat-tattva
and  pradhana  to  realize  Brahman?  Egolessness  is  not   equivalent   to
liberation,  since  at  the  time  of  universal  annihilation,   when   the
conditioned jivas merge into the body of  Maha-Visnu,  they  are  devoid  of
false ego but still bound by their karma.
   An analysis of the word “Brahman” reveals still further problems for  the
Mayavadis. Every  word  has  an  inherent  relationship  with  its  meaning.
According to Srila Jiva Gosvami  in  his  Hari-namamrta-vyakarana  (2.1),  a
word that refers to something denotes either an object, a quality, a  class,
or an activity. Certainly the word “Brahman” represents neither a class  nor
an activity. If Brahman were a quality,  there  would  have  to  be  another
object  possessing  that  quality,  since  no  quality  can  exist   without
belonging to some object.  If,  as  the  last  alternative,  Brahman  is  an
object, then it must possess qualities  because  an  eternal  object  cannot
exist without qualities. In either case, Brahman enters into a duality.
   Mayavadis explain this material world on the  basis  of  Maya,  which  is
neither  sat  (real)  nor  asat  (unreal).  They  say  that  Maya  is   thus
inexplicable (anirvacaniya). But in the Bhagavad-gita (2.16) Lord Sri  Krsna
recognizes only two categories, sat and asat:
   nasato vidyate bhavo nabhavo vidyate satah
   ubhayor api drsto ’ntas tv anayos tattva-darsibhih
“Those who are seers of the truth have concluded that the unreal (asat)  has
no existence and that the real (sat)  has  no  nonexistence.”  There  is  no
mention here or in any other bona fide scripture of  an  inexplicable  third
mode. Thus there is no foundation for the Mayavadis’ concept that  Maya  and
the material world generated from her  belong  to  some  inexplicable  third
category.
   To prove  their  contention  that  the  material  world  is  inexplicable
(anirvacaniya or mithya), neither real nor unreal, the Sankarites  cite  the
well-known example of the rope and the  snake.  If  snakes  were  completely
nonexistent (asat), they say, no one would ever mistake a rope  for  one  in
semidarkness, because a nonexistent thing can never  be  perceived.  So  the
“snake” is not nonexistent, but still it cannot  be  considered  real  (sat)
either, because in sufficient light no snake will be seen. Thus  there  must
be a third category, separate from both sat and asat.  This  third  category
is anirvacaniya, inexplicable, and to it the Sankarites assign Maya.
   The truth,  however,  is  that  one  need  not  resort  to  the  Mayavada
philosophy to explain the rope mistaken for a snake. The snake and the  rope
are both real.  A  person  who  mistakes  a  rope  for  a  snake  must  have
previously  experienced  a  real  snake,  and   the   conditions   must   be
insufficient for correct perception. His experience  of  snakes,  therefore,
will cause his mind to superimpose the impression of a snake on the rope  in
semidarkness. By contrast, someone who has  no  experience  of  snakes  will
never mistake a rope for one. An infant, for example, will never  mistake  a
rope for snake. Thus there is no inexplicable  third  category  in  material
existence, as the Mayavadis claim.
   Since Mayavadis accept only Brahman as the  ultimate  reality,  they  say
that even scriptures that teach such statements as tat tvam  asi  (“You  are
that”) are true only empirically. Although such declarations have the  power
to uplift those who hear them, they are not absolutely  true.  In  this  way
the Sankarites expose yet another inconsistency  in  their  system.  If  the
scriptures are only empirically real, how can  they  elevate  anyone  beyond
Maya? By this logic even the enlightened writings of  such  liberated  souls
as Yajïavalkya and Sankara are unable to liberate their  readers,  for,  not
being absolute, they must be full of relative imperfections.
   In truth the jiva is not, as the Mayavadis  say,  merely  an  adulterated
version of Brahman. As the Supreme Lord states in the Bhagavad-gita  (15.7),
mamaivamso  jiva-loke  jiva-bhutah  sanatanah:  “The  jiva  is  My   eternal
fragment.” Thus the jiva can never lose his identity by  merging  back  into
the Brahman it supposedly really is. When wheat berries and rice grains  are
mixed,  they  do  not  merge  into  one  another  and  lose  their  separate
identities. We can easily distinguish the wheat from the rice. If,  however,
we mix papaya seeds with some  similar-looking  black  peppercorns,  we  may
have difficulty distinguishing between them. Still, this does not mean  they
have lost their distinct identities.
   Similarly, the jivas cannot merge into Brahman and lose  their  identity.
Of course, if a jiva wants to feel that  he  has  merged  with  Brahman  and
performs the appropriate spiritual practices, the all-merciful Supreme  Lord
will help that jiva imagine he has attained literal  oneness  with  Him.  In
reality, God and the jivas are always distinct, and both the  Lord  and  His
pure devotees are always aware of this distinction.
   Having established that the  Mayavadis’  philosophy  is  opposed  to  the
truths  revealed  in   Vyasadeva’s   meditative   experience,   and   having
highlighted some of  the  prominent  defects  in  their  logic,  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami next argues  that  the  monistic  conclusion  also  contradicts  the
experience of Sukadeva Gosvami, the principal speaker of Srimad-Bhagavatam.


===== TS.41 =====
NUMBER: 41
SOURCE LABEL: Text 41

TEXT 41
   kim ca yady  atrabheda-vada  eva  tatparyam  abhavisyat  tarhy  ekam  eva
brahmajïanena bhinnam jïanena tu  tasya  bheda-mayam  duhkham  viliyata  ity
apasyad ity evavaksyat. tatha  Sri-bhagaval-liladinam  vastavatvabhave  sati
Sri-suka-hrdaya-virodhas ca jayate.
   Furthermore, if the jivas’ absolute oneness with Brahman were the  actual
purport of Srimad-Bhagavatam,  Suta  Gosvami  would  have  said  that  Srila
Vyasadeva saw in His trance how the one Brahman becomes divided  because  of
ignorance, and how knowledge dispels the suffering caused by  this  duality.
And if the Supreme Lord’s pastimes  and  qualities  were  unreal,  what  Sri
Sukadeva experienced in his heart would be invalidated.


   COMMENTARY
   Srila Vyasadeva’s Experience Does Not Support Advaita Monism
   Having presented his logical refutations of Advaita  monism,  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami  now  proceeds  to  disprove  it  by  reference  to   sabda-pramana,
scriptural evidence. This is the Vedic system. Logic by itself  cannot  give
us an understanding of the Absolute Truth, the Personality  of  Godhead.  In
transcendental  matters  such  as  this,  the  final  authority  is   always
scripture. Scriptural evidence is so decisive that even if a  certain  claim
defies logic but is supported by sabda-pramana, it  should  be  accepted  as
conclusively  true.  Any  standard  of  truth  lower  than  this  would   be
inconsistent with Vedantic epistemology, which is based on  the  axiom  that
the Vedas emanate from the Absolute and are thus infallible.
   Earlier, in the pramana  portion  of  Sri  Tattva-sandarbha,  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami showed that Srimad-Bhagavatam is the  supreme  authority  among  all
types of pramanas. Now he puts Advaita monism to  Srimad-Bhagavatam’s  test.
The essential message of the Bhagavatam is found  in  the  verses  narrating
what Srila Vyasa saw in trance—the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  along
with His internal potencies, His  marginal  potency  (the  jivas),  and  His
external potency (Maya). Vyasa  did  not  see  a  nondifferentiated  Brahman
being overpowered by Maya and turning into many jivas. Rather, He  saw  that
the jivas are distinct from the Supreme Lord  and  are  captivated  by  Maya
because they think themselves independent of the Lord.  Vyasadeva  thus  saw
that  the  cause  of  the  jivas’  suffering  is  their   sense   of   false
independence. At the same time, He saw  that  the  solution  to  the  jivas’
predicament is rendering devotional service to the Supreme  Person  (bhakti-
yogam adhoksaje), not imagining a state of oneness with Him.
   In Suta Gosvami’s prayers to Sukadeva Gosvami, his spiritual master, Suta
confirms that merging with impersonal Brahman is  an  inferior  goal.  While
speaking Srimad-Bhagavatam  to  the  sages  at  Naimisaranya,  Suta  Gosvami
specifically mentions that originally Sukadeva was absorbed in the bliss  of
Brahman. Later his  heart  was  captivated  when  he  heard  a  few  Srimad-
Bhagavatam verses describing the  pastimes  and  attributes  of  Krsna,  the
Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Sukadeva  was  so  entranced   that   he
thoroughly studied  the  description  of  the  Lord’s  pastimes  in  Srimad-
Bhagavatam, and later he excelled in narrating the Bhagavatam.
   Therefore it is said that the Bhagavatam, which is the ripened  fruit  of
the tree of Vedic literature, became even more relishable when  it  emanated
from the mouth  of  Sukadeva.  Suka  means  “parrot,”  and  Sukadeva’s  name
alludes to the well-known  fact  that  fruits  become  sweeter  after  being
pecked by parrots. When the fruit of the Bhagavatam was touched by  Sukadeva
Gosvami’s lips and then tasted by Pariksit Maharaja, it became sweeter  than
ever.
   Srila Sukadeva Gosvami’s attraction to the Bhagavatam indicates that  the
pastimes and attributes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are both  real
and completely transcendental; otherwise a  liberated  soul  like  Sukadeva,
who was beyond all mundane desires, would have never taken  an  interest  in
them.  Sukadeva  Gosvami,  the  most   eminent   of   all   Brahman-realized
transcendentalists, demonstrated by his own  behavior  the  falsity  of  the
idea of absolute oneness between the Lord and the jivas.
   Thus  we  can  conclude  that  the  keys  to  the  Advaita  doctrine   of
monism—namely, pariccheda-vada and pratibimba-vada—are supported neither  by
logic nor by the  scriptures,  especially  not  by  the  supreme  scriptural
pramana, Srimad-Bhagavatam. The Mayavadis derive their  opinions  only  from
word jugglery and the distortion of scriptural truths, with the result  that
the innocent who hear their explanations become confused.
   Next Srila Jiva Gosvami explains the purpose of the  monistic  statements
found in the Vedic scriptures.


===== TS.42 =====
NUMBER: 42
SOURCE LABEL: Text 42

TEXT 42
   tasmat pariccheda-pratibimbatvadi-pratipadaka-sastrany api kathaïcit tad-
sadrsyena  gaunyaiva   vrttya   pravarteran.   `ambu-vad-agrahanat   tu   na
tathatvam' `vrddhi-hrasa-bhaktatvam  antar-bhavad  ubhaya-samaïjasyad  evam'
iti purvottara-paksa-maya-nyayabhyam.
   Therefore scriptural passages that appear  to  favor  such  doctrines  as
pariccheda-vada and  pratibimba-vada  must  be  understood  in  a  secondary
sense—that is, as expressing some sort of similarity between  the  Supreme’s
relation to the manifest world and the ordinary processes  of  division  and
reflection. The Vedanta-sutra confirms this idea:
   “The water in a pond covers the land underneath and thus delimits it from
the rest of the earth, but Brahman  cannot  be  delimited  in  this  way  to
become a jiva” [V.s. 3.2.19].
   “No, the reference to delimitation is  appropriate  not  in  its  primary
sense but in its secondary sense, that of the water  delimiting  larger  and
smaller areas of land. This  interpretation  fulfills  the  purpose  of  the
scriptural passages, and thus it is appropriate to compare Brahman to  land”
[V.s. 3.2.20].
   The first of these sutras gives an opponent’s objection, and  the  second
replies to that objection.


   COMMENTARY
   The Meaning of Monistic Statements in the Vedas
   The Mayavadis accept the Vedas as the supreme  authority  and  cite  them
profusely  in  support  of  their  opinions.  Indeed,  many  of  the   Vedic
references they quote may seem to support their  theories,  but  here  Srila
Jiva Gosvami explains how to correctly  interpret  the  apparently  monistic
statements in the Vedas.
   In Sanskrit, words have two  kinds  of  meanings—primary,  called  mukhya
vrtti, and secondary, called gauni vrtti. Vedic  philosophers  say  that  by
the will of the Supreme Lord each word has some  particular  potency,  which
creates a specific relationship  between  the  word  and  its  meaning.  For
example, the word “cow” has a potency by which it  refers  to  a  particular
entity having four legs, a tail, two eyes, a dewlap,  an  udder,  and  other
features. Sometimes, however, in a particular con
   TEXT a word’s primary meaning fails to convey a relevant sense.  In  such
cases we should conclude that the expression is figurative and  accept  some
appropriate secondary meaning. Whenever the primary meaning of a  scriptural
statement is inappropriate there  must  be  a  secondary  meaning  intended,
because scriptural statements, being apauruseya and thus  free  of  defects,
cannot be meaningless. In the Bhagavad-gita Lord Krsna addresses  Arjuna  as
purusa-vyaghra, “tiger among men.” In its primary  sense  the  word  “tiger”
refers to a ferocious animal with claws and fangs. Arjuna was certainly  not
such an animal, but since Lord Krsna’s  words  cannot  be  meaningless,  the
need arises for a figurative  interpretation  of  purusa-vyaghra.  Here  the
phrase is a metaphor, in which the Lord is calling Arjuna a  tiger  only  to
indicate his courage and prowess as a warrior.  The  word  “tiger”  in  this
phrase applies to these two characteristics that the tiger and  Arjuna  have
in common, not to the primary sense of  a  tiger’s  shape,  habits,  and  so
forth.
   In the same way, Vedic texts that appear to support monistic ideas should
not be abandoned as ambiguous babblings just because their  primary  meaning
contradicts the conclusion  of  Srila  Vyasa’s  trance.  Rather,  we  should
interpret these statements in a way consistent with the  underlying  purport
of  the  Vedas.  Accepting  them  literally  will  lead  to  confusion,  and
rejecting them outright may lead to contempt for  the  apauruseya-sabda.  In
the opinion of Srila Jiva Gosvami, one must search  for  secondary  meanings
that agree with Srila Vyasa’s experience.
   To support this judgment, Srila Jiva Gosvami refers us to  sutras  3.2.19
and 20 of the Vedanta. The  Vedanta-sutra  is  divided  into  four  chapters
(adhyayas), each having four sections (padas).  These  are  further  divided
into adhikaranas. Each  adhikarana  includes  a  topic  statement  from  the
Upanisads followed by a doubt concerning that statement, then an  opponent’s
position (purva-paksa), then the right conclusion (siddhanta),  and  finally
sangati,  a  demonstration  of  how  the   adhikarana   relates   to   other
adhikaranas. Some sutras are simply antitheses that represent  the  opinions
of various sages and philosophers. These are always followed  by  siddhanta-
sutras.
   Sutra 3.2.18 establishes that the purpose behind mentioning the jiva as a
reflection of the Paramatma is not to show that the  Paramatma  becomes  the
jiva by reflection but to show that the  Paramatma  is  different  from  the
jiva in the same way that any real object is different from its  reflection.
If an object and its reflection were  absolutely  nondifferent,  they  could
not be distinguished from each other. Thus the metaphor of the sun  and  its
reflection in water is  presented  to  establish  not  the  oneness  of  the
Paramatma and the jivatma but just the opposite. Sutra  3.2.18  states,  ata
eva copama suryakadi-vat:  “Therefore,  the  analogy  of  the  sun  and  its
reflection shows the difference between the Supersoul and the soul.”
   A doubt is then raised: “This very  analogy  proves  that  the  Paramatma
reflects in avidya and appears to become the jiva. What’s  wrong  with  this
interpretation?”
   The next sutra (3.2.19) answers this doubt. It proves that  the  jiva  is
not a reflection of Brahman by pointing out that an  upadhi  cannot  delimit
Brahman in the same way that water can delimit  land.  While  commenting  on
this sutra in his Govinda-bhasya, Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana explains  that
since Brahman is all-pervading, no object can possibly be distant from  Him.
Therefore, while the sun can cast a reflection in water because it  is  some
distance from the water, Brahman can cast no reflection in anything  because
it is all-pervading. Therefore the jiva cannot be a reflection of Brahman.
   Although the claim of this sutra is valid, it does not agree  with  those
scriptural statements that seem to indicate the  jiva  is  a  reflection  of
Brahman. It is in this sense that Srila Jiva  Gosvami  calls  this  sutra  a
purva-paksa. But if Brahman does not reflect as the jiva  in  the  same  way
that the sun reflects on water, what do the sruti statements to that  effect
actually mean? They must have some reasonable  purpose.  Vyasadeva  responds
with the siddhanta, or conclusion, in sutra twenty. Although the  comparison
of the sun and its reflection with Brahman and the jiva is  not  valid  when
interpreted  literally,  it  is  valid  when  we  consider   the   secondary
characteristics of the analogy: The sun  is  great  like  Brahman,  and  its
reflection  is  small  like  the  jiva.  Why  do  we  give  this   secondary
interpretation? To uphold the scripture’s conclusions, which constitute  the
overarching,  consistent  message  of  the   Vedas   and   their   corollary
literature. Other valid interpretations of this analogy are as follows:  (1)
The jivas’ pains and pleasures do not affect Brahman, just  as  disturbances
in a reflection of  the  sun  do  not  affect  the  sun  itself.  (2)  As  a
reflection of the sun is dependent on the sun, so the  jivas  are  dependent
on Brahman. (3) The jivas are localized like the  sun’s  reflections,  while
Brahman extends everywhere as the sun does through its heat and light.
   If we were to similarly analyze the remaining Brahma-sutras, as  well  as
the Vedas and Puranas, we would discover that all the scriptural  statements
indicating nondifference between God and the living entity, when  understood
in such a secondary sense, prove to be based not on absolute oneness but  on
some common attributes between the analogy and its subject,  and  thus  they
are faithful to the conclusion of the Vedas. The Vedic texts  never  propose
complete oneness between Brahman and the jiva. Such a  proposal  would  make
the whole body of Vedic scripture self-contradictory; it  would  reduce  the
Vedas to babble, a waste of time  for  anyone  wanting  to  study  them  for
spiritual enlightenment. One may  here  raise  the  objection,  “Instead  of
rejecting the primary sense of the monistic statements found in sastra,  why
not  accept  them  and  instead  reinterpret  those  statements  that  teach
dualism?” The  answer  is  that  the  understanding  derived  from  such  an
approach would contradict Sri Vyasa’s experience, which is  the  nucleus  of
the Srimad-Bhagavatam, the topmost pramana.
   Next, Srila Jiva Gosvami explains the nondifference between  the  Supreme
Lord and the jiva from the Vaisnava point of view.


===== TS.43 =====
NUMBER: 43
SOURCE LABEL: Text 43

TEXT 43
   tata evabheda-sastrany ubhayos  cid-rupatvena  jiva-samuhasya  tad-ekatve
’pi durghata-ghatana-patiyasya svabhavika-tad-acintya-saktya svabhavata  eva
tad-rasmi-paramanu-gana-sthaniyatvat tad-vyatirekenavyatirekena ca  virodham
parihrtyagre  muhur   api   tad-etad-vyasa-samadhi-labdha-siddhanta-yojanaya
yojaniyani.
   Therefore  the   scriptural   statements   instructing   us   about   the
nondifference between the jivas and Brahman should be reconciled  so  as  to
agree  with  the  conclusions  Vyasa  came  to  in  His  trance.   This   is
accomplished by first removing the  apparent  contradiction  in  the  jivas’
being both different and nondifferent from Brahman:  From  these  statements
teaching nondifference we should understand that  the  jivas  are  one  with
Brahman in  the  sense  that  both  they  and  Brahman  are  pure  spiritual
entities, while by Brahman’s inconceivable,  natural  potency,  which  makes
even the impossible possible, the jivas  are  also  innately  distinct  from
Brahman by virtue of their being His parts, like the infinitesimal  rays  of
the sun’s light.


   COMMENTARY
   Monistic Statements Need Interpretation
   Here Srila Jiva Gosvami gives his definitive opinion about  the  relation
between the jivas and the Supreme Lord. Both the  Lord  and  the  jivas  are
naturally conscious beings, and it is primarily this common trait  that  the
Vedic literature refers to when it speaks about their oneness.  The  purpose
of these statements is to help us  understand  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead, who is beyond our experience. We know we are conscious, and  so  to
give us some idea of His nature  the  Vedas  employ  various  analogies  and
metaphors to illustrate that the Lord is conscious like us.  In  the  course
of these descriptions, we jivas  are  sometimes  described  as  nondifferent
from Him.
   Thus we should never misunderstand the Vedic statements about oneness  to
mean that the Lord and the jiva are one in all respects. When  we  read  “He
was a tiger in battle” we do not think that a man  actually  turned  into  a
tiger. Rather, we accept a secondary meaning and understand that  in  battle
the man was as ferocious as  a  tiger.  We  must  accept  similar  secondary
meanings for the statements in the Vedic literature  about  the  jiva’s  and
Brahman’s   oneness,   our   criterion   always   remaining   whether    our
interpretation  is  consistent  with  the  principles  derived  from   Srila
Vyasadeva’s trance.
   Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  is  a  follower  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam’s   acintya-
bhedabheda philosophy, which he alludes to in  the  last  sentence  of  this
Text. Acintya-bhedabheda  means  “inconceivable,  simultaneous  oneness  and
difference” between the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead  and  the  living
entity, or in other words between the energetic source and its  energy.  The
energy cannot  exist  without  the  energetic  and  is  thus  in  one  sense
identical to it. At the same time, the energy can be said  to  be  different
from the energetic source because the energy’s activities are  perceived  to
be separate from the energetic. Logically, such  a  relation  is  ultimately
inconceivable.
   The jivas are like atomic rays of light in relation to the sunlike  Lord.
As  the  Svetasvatara  Upanisad  (6.8)  states,  parasya  saktir  vividhaiva
sruyate: “The Supreme Lord has manifold  energies.”  Just  as  the  rays  of
sunlight are neither completely different from nor exactly the same  as  the
sun, so the jivas are simultaneously one with and different from  the  Lord.
The Vedas’ descriptions of nondifference refer to  the  qualitative  oneness
of the Lord and the jivas, and the Vedas’ descriptions of  difference  refer
to their quantitative difference.
   The Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad (2.1.20)  provides  an  analogy  to  help  us
understand: yathagneh visphulinga vyuccaranti evam eva asmad  atmanah  sarve
pranah sarve lokah sarve devah sarvani bhutani vyuccaranti. “Just as  sparks
emanate from a fire, so all these vital airs, planets, demigods, and  living
beings  come  from  the  Personality  of  Godhead.”  Sparks  are   obviously
different from the fire that manifests them, but  because  they  possess  in
minute quantity such fiery qualities as heat and light, they can be said  to
be “one with” the fire as well. In the same way, the jivas can  be  said  to
be simultaneously different from and one with  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead. Any apparent inconsistency in this relationship is resolved by  the
inconceivable creative energy of  the  Supreme  Lord,  which  can  make  the
impossible possible.
   One should not confuse this inconceivable nature of  the  Lord  with  the
inexplicable (anirvacaniya) nature that the Mayavadis ascribe to Maya.  They
say that Maya is neither sat (“real”)  nor  asat  (“unreal”)  and  is  hence
indescribable. Vaisnavas,  however,  do  not  say  that  the  Lord  and  His
energies are  indescribable,  for  the  scriptures  describe  both.  Instead
Vaisnavas  say  that  because  the   Lord’s   nature   and   qualities   are
inconceivable to our limited mind and intellect, the Lord can be  understood
only through sabda-pramana. Some of the Lord’s  inconceivable  features  are
mentioned in the Isopanisad (5):
   tad ejati tan naijati tad dure tad v antike
   tad antarasya sarvasya tad u sarvasyasya bahyatah
“The Supreme Lord walks and does not walk. He is far away  but  He  is  very
near  as  well.  He  is  within  everything,  and  yet  He  is  outside   of
everything.”
   Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana gives us another analogy  that  may  help  us
understand acintya-bhedabheda-tattva: A  fair-skinned  brahmana  boy  and  a
dark-skinned brahmana boy are the same in terms of caste but  are  different
as individuals. Similarly, the Supreme Lord and the jiva  are  one  in  that
they both possess consciousness, but they are different in that the Lord  is
the all-pervading, all-knowing, independent controller of Maya, whereas  the
jiva is localized and may be an ignorant, dependent slave of Maya.
   Sometimes  the  Vedas  equate  the  jiva  with  Brahman  because  he   is
subservient to Brahman. The principle behind this idea  is  not  unfamiliar.
An ambassador, for example, is in one sense equal to the chief of  state  he
represents, and because of this equivalence any respect or disrespect  shown
the ambassador redounds upon his master. The  reason  why  people  accept  a
rough equivalence between the two is that the ambassador  has  some  of  the
master’s power, but no one would ever foolishly consider them  identical  in
all respects. The Mayavadis err by choosing to see  just  one  side  of  the
situation and emphasizing  only  the  nondifference  between  the  jiva  and
Brahman.
   One should not deal with the Vedas according  to  the  logic  of  “ardha-
kukkuti,”[11] accepting only statements favorable  to  one’s  viewpoint  and
rejecting opposing ones. The Vedas contain  statements  declaring  both  the
difference and  the  nondifference  between  Brahman  and  the  jiva.  These
seemingly contradictory views  can  most  naturally  be  reconciled  by  the
application of the acintya-bhedabheda  philosophy.  This  doctrine  of  Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s is the greatest gift of philosophy to the  world.  His
teachings do not contradict any Vedic scripture or authentic point of  view;
rather, they resolve the apparent contradictions in the Vedic literature  in
accordance with the Vedas’ final conclusions. His teachings are the  natural
and direct explanation of the Vedic literature.
   In summary, what follows are the ideas underlying  the  Vedic  statements
that speak of the oneness of Brahman and the jivas, employing the  analogies
of reflection and delimitation:
   1. The jiva, like Brahman, is by nature purely conscious.
   2. The jiva, like Brahman, is distinct from matter.
   3. The jiva is one of Brahman’s energies.
   4. The jiva is eternally dependent on Brahman.
   5. The jiva can never be absolutely one with Brahman.
   6. The jiva is constitutionally the eternal servitor of Brahman.
   7. The analogies of reflection and delimitation help  us  understand  the
purely spiritual nature of Brahman.
   In the Paramatma-sandarbha Srila Jiva Gosvami will further  describe  the
living entity and his relationship with the Supreme Lord. In the next
   TEXT he summarizes  the  facts  concerning  abhidheya,  the  process  for
realizing this subject.


===== TS.44 =====
NUMBER: 44
SOURCE LABEL: Text 44

TEXT 44
   tad evam mayasrayatva-maya-mohitatvabhyam sthite dvayor bhede  `daivi  hy
esa' ity-adi-nyayena tad-bhajanasyaivabhidheyatvam ayatam.
   Since the Supreme Lord and the jiva thus have  distinct  identities,  the
Lord being the foundation of Maya and the jiva being deluded by her, we  can
conclude that devotional service to the Lord is the only recommended  method
for  self-realization.  This  conclusion   follows   logically   from   such
scriptural statements as the following  one  in  the  Bhagavad-gita  [7.14]:
“This divine energy of Mine, consisting  of  the  three  modes  of  material
nature, is difficult to overcome. Only those who have  surrendered  unto  Me
can easily cross beyond it.”


   COMMENTARY
   Devotional Service Is the Abhidheya
   Srila Vyasadeva saw that the Supreme Lord  is  the  foundation  of  Maya:
mayam ca tad-apasrayam (Bhag. 1.7.4). He  also  saw  that  only  the  living
entity is deluded by Maya: yaya sammohito  jivah  (Bhag.  1.7.5).  Thus  the
Supreme Lord and the jiva are naturally distinct, for the Lord  never  comes
under Maya’s spell. The Lord can never turn into a jiva,  and  no  jiva  can
ever make himself God. Srila Vyasadeva also  saw  that  the  means  for  the
jiva’s release from bondage is  devotional  service  to  the  Supreme  Lord:
bhakti-yogam adhoksaje (Bhag. 1.7.6).
   In this
   TEXT the word eva in the phrase  tad  bhajanasya  eva  means  “only”  and
indicates that no process other than bhakti-yoga can cut the bonds of  Maya.
No other method, not even jïana-yoga or astanga-yoga, is  potent  enough  to
permanently relieve the jivas’ miseries.  As  Lord  Krsna  declares  in  the
Bhagavad-gita (7.14): daivi hy esa guna-mayi mama maya  duratyaya/  mam  eva
ye prapadyante mayam etam taranti te. Maya, the divine energy of  the  Lord,
cannot possibly be overcome by anyone except the person who surrenders  unto
Him. Other paths may at best elevate a person to the  mode  of  goodness  by
purifying his heart of the lower modes, but they cannot elevate him to  full
transcendence without the merciful help of bhakti.
   Narada Muni confirms this in his teachings to Yudhisthira Maharaja (Bhag.
7.15.28–29):
   sad-varga-samyamaikantah sarva niyama-codanah
   tad-anta yadi no yogan avaheyuh sramavahah


   yatha vartadayo hy artha yogasyartham na bibhrati
   anarthaya bhaveyuh sma purtam istam tathasatah
“Ritualistic  ceremonies,  regulative  principles,  austerities,   and   the
practice of yoga are all meant to control the  senses  and  mind,  but  even
after one is able to control the senses and mind, if he  does  not  come  to
the point of meditation upon the  Supreme  Lord,  all  such  activities  are
simply labor in frustration. As professional activities or business  profits
cannot help one in spiritual  advancement  but  are  a  source  of  material
entanglement, the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies cannot  help  anyone  who  is
not a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”
   In this
   TEXT the word bheda (“difference”) is also significant. By using it Srila
Jiva Gosvami emphasizes that unless the jiva clearly understands he is  both
different from and subordinate to the  Supreme  Lord,  he  will  not  become
interested in pursuing devotional service. This conviction is essential  for
advancement in spiritual life. The natural tendency of  a  conditioned  soul
is to think himself the controller, the lord of all  he  surveys,  and  this
delusion makes him loathe  the  very  idea  of  surrendering  to  the  Lord.
Indeed, this tendency to control  remains  a  great  peril  even  for  those
actively engaged in bhakti-yoga, since the jivas’  desires  to  control  are
very deep-rooted and can sprout forth at any time, choking  off  the  tender
creeper of devotion. Unless a  candidate  for  unalloyed  bhakti  vigilantly
guards against residual desires to be the master of all, these desires  will
likely  manifest  themselves  and  slow  his  progress  toward  pure   Krsna
consciousness.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami concludes this part  of  his  discussion  with  a
reference to the prayojana, or final goal, of bhakti-yoga.


===== TS.45 =====
NUMBER: 45
SOURCE LABEL: Text 45

TEXT 45
   atah  Sri-bhagavata   eva   sarva-hitopadestrtvat   sarva-duhkha-haratvad
rasminam  surya-vat  sarvesam  parama-svarupatvat   sarvadhika-guna-salitvat
parama-prema-yogatvam iti prayojanam ca sthapitam.
   From the above discussion we can see that the Personality of  Godhead  is
the most deserving recipient  of  perfect  love  because  He  instructs  all
people  about  their  ultimate  welfare,  He  removes  all  sorrows,  He  is
everyone’s Supreme Self (like the sun in relation to its rays),  and  He  is
perfectly endowed with all wonderful  qualities.  Thus  is  established  the
final goal of all endeavor (prayojana).


   COMMENTARY
   Love of God Is the Goal of Life
   The Vedas provide education  in  religious  practice  (dharma),  economic
development  (artha),  regulated  sense  enjoyment  (kama),  and  ultimately
liberation from the cycle of birth and death (moksa). These four  are  known
as the purusarthas, or goals of  human  life.  On  the  basis  of  logic  or
scriptural authority, every school of Indian philosophy tries to direct  the
jivas toward liberation, which puts an end to all miseries.
   Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu’s teachings, however,  lead  beyond  liberation.
When Sanatana Gosvami approached Sri Caitanya  to  inquire  about  spiritual
life, his first question was  “What  is  my  duty  after  liberation?”  This
question was revolutionary. Before this, almost no one would  inquire  about
a fifth purusartha; liberation was considered the ultimate  goal.  But  Lord
Caitanya explained to Sanatana that prema, love of God,  is  the  fifth  and
ultimate goal of life  (païcama-purusartha):  prema  pum-artho  mahan.  Lord
Caitanya established this purusartha with reference to  the  Vedas,  and  in
the course of doing so  He  relied  especially  on  “the  spotless  Purana,”
Srimad-Bhagavatam, promoting it as the ultimate scriptural authority.  Along
with the final goal of pure love of God, Sri Caitanya also established  that
Lord Krsna is the most complete manifestation of God and therefore the  most
perfect object of loving devotional service.
   Prior  to  Lord  Caitanya,  Vaisnavas  generally   rendered   reverential
devotional service to the Supreme Lord in His opulent feature.  Only  a  few
rare souls knew the true conclusion of the Vedic  teachings.  Lord  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, however, revealed to all His followers the  fifth  goal—love  of
God—and ordered them to propagate it everywhere. If  a  person  makes  prema
his ultimate goal in life,  he  will  not  detest  the  material  world  (as
impersonalists do), because he will appreciate it as  the  creation  of  his
beloved Lord. Following the example of Sri Caitanya  Mahaprabhu,  a  devotee
should see everything in this world in relation to the Supreme Lord and  use
whatever he can in His devotional  service.  One  who  adopts  this  correct
outlook will quickly be endowed with all good qualities. The evil traits  of
lust, greed, envy, and so on will depart from  him.  Treating  every  living
being as part and parcel of  the  Lord,  he  will  become  everyone’s  well-
wishing friend and not think of harming or exploiting anyone,  even  in  his
dreams.
   With the followers of Lord Caitanya able to cultivate such  an  attitude,
it is clear  that  His  teachings  are  the  most  sublime,  practical,  and
versatile of all spiritual philosophies. Although these teachings  emphasize
giving up this world and going to the spiritual world, following  them  also
improves the quality of  life  here.  Lord  Caitanya’s  teachings  are  thus
suitable for all people to study and practice, regardless of  caste,  creed,
or nationality.
   By contrast, when a spiritual practitioner  makes  liberation  his  final
objective, he will almost never  develop  a  loving  relationship  with  the
Supreme Lord. Rather, he will attempt to use the  Supreme  Lord  to  achieve
his goal. It is not uncommon to find liberationists  who  at  first  worship
the Deity forms of Radha-Krsna and then discard these forms at a  supposedly
higher stage of development, when they imagine they  have  advanced  to  the
level of Brahman realization. Such deluded souls  think  that  because  they
have achieved oneness with the Supreme they no longer need the Deity forms.
   For the Mayavadis, then, the  Lord  is  nothing  more  than  a  means  to
liberation, and thus their impersonalistic philosophy is the  ultimate  form
of selfishness and blasphemy. Based on detachment  and  introversion,  their
doctrine cannot bring warmth and sympathy,  compassion  and  serenity,  into
human society. It only depersonalizes human life.
   A pure devotee advancing on the path of loving devotional service is  not
inclined to demand anything of his Lord, not  even  liberation.  He  desires
only to please his worshipable Lord eternally. To  that  end  he  cheerfully
tolerates  any  tribulation.  Such  unconditional  love  is  in   fact   the
prayojana, or goal of life, promoted by Srimad-Bhagavatam. Although  in  the
previous
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami said that a jiva should worship the Lord  to  get
free from the clutches of Maya, here he goes further: he rejects  liberation
as the prayojana and hints at a new goal—love of Godhead, prema-bhakti.  Sri
Jiva will present his full discussion on prema-bhakti later, in  Sri  Priti-
sandarbha.
   In this
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami gives four reasons why the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is the most suitable object of love. The first reason  is  that  the
Supreme Lord is always  thinking  of  every  jiva’s  welfare.  Therefore  He
frequently teaches the conditioned souls various ways to better  themselves.
He comes Himself to give direct  instruction,  as  He  did  when  He  taught
Arjuna on the Battlefield of Kuruksetra and,  as  Veda-vyasa,  compiled  the
Vedic literature. To preach His message He also sends His devotees  to  this
material world as good-will ambassadors. Even  on  the  material  level  the
Supreme Lord takes care of all living beings by impartially  supplying  them
with such essentials as light, air,  water,  and  food.  Even  atheists  and
agnostics are provided for.
   The second reason why the Supreme Lord is the most worthy object of  love
is that He relieves the miseries of the  conditioned  souls  by  helping  to
liberate them from illusion. To take advantage of this  help,  however,  the
jivas must surrender to Him:
sarva-dharman parityajya mam ekam saranam vraja
aham tvam sarva-papebhyo moksayisyami ma sucah
“[Lord Krsna said to Arjuna:] ‘Abandon all varieties of  religion  and  just
surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all  sinful  reactions.  Do  not
fear’” (Bg. 18.66).
   The third reason why Sri Krsna is the most lovable object is that  He  is
the ultimate svarupa, or Self, of all beings, just as the sun globe  is  the
ultimate basis of the sun’s rays. The sun’s rays always depend on  the  sun,
and they are glorious only in relation to the sun.  In  the  same  way,  the
jivas perpetually depend on the Personality of Godhead and  become  glorious
only when they reawaken their true relationship  with  Him  through  bhakti-
yoga. Even material objects find peace only when they are united with  their
source: rivers all naturally seek the ocean and  become  finally  calm  when
they reach that goal; similarly, an earthy object separated from the  earth,
such as an apple thrown into the air, will  be  spontaneously  attracted  to
return to the earth. We also see that human beings naturally want to  revere
those they consider superior. Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,  is
the ultimate superior being, and therefore He is the ideal  person  in  whom
all jivas may repose their reverence and love.
   The last reason why Sri Krsna is the best  object  of  love  is  that  He
possesses all wonderful, matchless qualities to  their  fullest  extent.  Of
all the Supreme Lord’s own direct manifestations,  His  original  two-handed
form as a cowherd boy is the most beautiful and attractive. Thus Srila  Rupa
Gosvami writes in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.2.59)[12]:
   siddhantatas tv abhede ’pi krsna-Srisa-svarupayoh
   rasenotkrsyate krsna-rupam esa rasa-sthitih
“Although in principle there is no difference between the  personalities  of
Lord Krsna and Lord Narayana, the husband of the goddess of  fortune,  still
Sri Krsna’s form is the unparalleled reservoir of rasas.  This,  indeed,  is
the law of rasas.”
   Srila Vyasa saw this same Krsna in trance, along with  all  His  personal
attributes and potencies. He saw that love of Krsna is the ultimate goal  of
life: krsne parama-puruse bhaktih (Bhag. 1.7.7). Thus  we  can  conclude  by
both logic and scriptural analysis that Lord Krsna is the supreme object  of
love. He is the actual prayojana, the ultimate goal of life.
   Next Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  explains  the  importance  of  sadhana-bhakti,
devotional service in practice.




                              TATTVA SANDARBHA


                            BY SRILA JIVA GOSWAMI


                                  [PART 8]


===== TS.46 =====
NUMBER: 46
SOURCE LABEL: Text 46

TEXT 46.1
   tatrabhidheyam ca tadrsatvena drstavan api yatas tat-pravrtty-artham Sri-
bhagavatakhyam  imam  satvata-samhitam  pravartitavan  ity  aha,  anartheti.
bhakti-yogo ’tra sravana-kirtanadi-laksanah sadhana-bhakti-yogo na tu prema-
laksanah. anusthanam hy upadesapeksam prema tu tat-prasadapeksam iti.
   In trance Srila Vyasadeva also perceived the process of  self-realization
(abhidheya), as described above [in
   TEXT 44]. Then, to propagate it He composed  for  the  saintly  Vaisnavas
this scripture called Srimad-Bhagavatam.  Sri  Suta  Gosvami  describes  all
this in the verse beginning anartha- [Bhag. 1.7.6]. In this verse  the  word
bhakti-yoga refers to sadhana-bhakti, regulated  devotional  service,  which
is characterized by hearing, chanting, and so on, and not  to  prema-bhakti,
devotional service in pure love of God. This is the  correct  interpretation
because sadhana-bhakti depends on instruction, while  love  of  God  depends
only on the Lord’s grace.


   TEXT 46.2
   tathapi   tasya   tat-prasada-hetos   tat-prema-phala-garbhatvat   saksad
evanarthopasamanatvam na tv  anya-sapeksatvena  `yat  karmabhir  yat  tapasa
jïana-vairagyatas ca  yat'  ity-adau  `sarvam  mad-bhakti-yogena  mad-bhakto
labhate ’ïjasa svargapavargam' ity-adeh. jïanades tu bhakti-sapeksatvam  eva
`sreyah-srtim bhaktim' ity-adeh. atha vanarthasya  samsara-vyasanasya  tavat
saksad avyavadhanenopasamanam sammohadi-dvayasya  tu  premakhya-sviya-phala-
dvarenety arthah. atah purva-vad evatrabhidheyam darsitam.
   Even so, sadhana-bhakti, being the means for gaining  the  Lord’s  grace,
ultimately matures into love of Godhead.  Thus  it  is  said  that  sadhana-
bhakti  directly  removes  the  jiva’s  miseries  (anarthopasamam   saksad),
without depending on anything else.  As  the  Lord  states  in  the  Srimad-
Bhagavatam [11.20.32–33], “Everything  that  can  be  achieved  by  fruitive
activities, penance, knowledge, detachment, mystic yoga, charity,  religious
duties, and all other means of perfecting life  is  easily  achieved  by  My
devotee through loving service unto Me.  If  somehow  or  other  My  devotee
desires promotion to heaven,  liberation,  or  residence  in  My  abode,  he
easily  achieves  such  benedictions.”  By   contrast,   such   methods   as
cultivating knowledge depend on devotional service  for  success,  as  shown
instatements like the following [Bhag. 10.14.4]: “My dear  Lord,  devotional
service unto You is the best path for self-realization. If someone gives  up
that path and engages in the cultivation of speculative knowledge,  he  will
simply undergo a troublesome  process  and  will  not  achieve  his  desired
result. As a person who beats an empty husk of wheat cannot get  grain,  one
who simply speculates cannot achieve  self-realization.  His  only  gain  is
trouble.”
   Or else the meaning of  anarthopasamam  saksad  is  that  sadhana-bhakti,
without relying  on  any  intermediate  process,  directly  counteracts  the
material miseries but that only pure  love  of  God,  the  mature  fruit  of
sadhana-bhakti, can counteract the two fundamental  faults  of  bewilderment
and misidentification. Thus the abhidheya is expressed  here  [Bhag.  1.7.6]
as it was before [Texts 29 and 32].


   COMMENTARY
   The Definition of Abhidheya
   In
   TEXT 44 Jiva Gosvami concluded from his analysis of Srila Vyasa’s  trance
that Srimad-Bhagavatam’s  abhidheya-tattva  is  devotional  service  to  the
Supreme Lord. Vyasadeva also saw in His trance  that  the  miseries  of  the
jivas can be vanquished by bhakti-yoga alone,  and  that  this  practice  of
bhakti-yoga will further lead to pure love  of  Godhead,  which  brings  one
direct realization of the Lord. To broadcast this knowledge He compiled  the
beautiful Bhagavatam and taught it to His son, Sukadeva Gosvami.
   The word bhakti-yoga is used twice in the  Bhagavatam  verses  describing
Srila Vyasadeva’s trance. Srila Jiva Gosvami says that the first  occurrence
of this word (Bhag. 1.7.4) refers to spontaneous devotional service in  full
realization of prema, because only on that level of pure love can  one  have
direct personal realization of  the  Supreme  Lord.  The  second  occurrence
(Bhag. 1.7.6) refers to  devotional  service  in  practice,  sadhana-bhakti.
Unlike sadhana-bhakti, prema-bhakti does not depend on  instruction  because
at  that  stage  a  devotee  offers   devotional   service   to   the   Lord
spontaneously.
   Sadhana-bhakti must be learned from scripture and from  saintly  persons;
it is motivated for the most part by scriptural injunctions. As the  devotee
performs the regulated practice of bhakti, his heart is  gradually  purified
and he becomes fit for spontaneous devotional service in love of  God.  Only
in this sense can it be said that sadhana-bhakti matures into  prema-bhakti.
But in fact prema, the internal  potency  of  the  Lord,  manifests  in  the
aspiring devotee’s heart by the grace of the Lord and His pure devotee.
   In the Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu Srila Rupa Gosvami states  that  devotional
service which is executed by the senses and which matures into  bhava-bhakti
is called sadhana-bhakti. When bhava-bhakti intensifies it is called  prema-
bhakti. The only difference between the two  is  the  degree  of  intensity:
bhava-bhakti is the immature state of  prema-bhakti.  Bhava-bhakti  is  like
the dawn, prema-bhakti like high  noon.  Thus  Srila  Rupa  Gosvami  defines
prema-bhakti as follows:
   samyan-masrnita-svanto mamatvatisayankitah
   bhavah sa eva sandratma budhaih prema nigadyate
“When bhava becomes very dense and the devotee’s heart melts completely  out
of intense love for the Lord and great attachment  to  Him,  that  state  of
bhava is called prema by learned scholars” (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.4.1).
   Because devotion belongs to the internal potency (svarupa-sakti)  of  the
Supreme Lord, it is as potent as He is  and  can  certainly  fulfill  all  a
devotee’s desires. A pure devotee has no desire except to  render  the  Lord
service, but if somehow he does have some other desire,  to  fulfill  it  he
need not take to  any  process  other  than  bhakti.  This  is  the  supreme
independence of pure devotional service.
   On the other hand, other progressive processes, such  as  jïana-yoga  and
astanga-yoga, depend on  the  grace  of  bhakti  for  success.  Without  the
merciful glance of devotion, none of these processes  can  ever  give  their
practitioners their own intended fruits, what to speak of love of God.  Just
as the body and the senses are worthless without the soul,  so  these  paths
are worthless  without  devotion.  In  Srimad-Bhagavatam,  therefore,  after
Sukadeva Gosvami lists various demigods one may worship to fulfill  material
desires, he concludes:
   akamah sarva-kamo va moksa-kama udara-dhih
   tivrena bhakti-yogena yajeta purusam param
“A person who has broader intelligence,  whether  he  is  full  of  material
desires, without any material desires, or desiring only liberation, must  by
all means worship the supreme whole,  the  Personality  of  Godhead”  (Bhag.
2.3.10). This statement reveals that bhakti-yoga is the  key  to  fulfilling
all desires, whether spiritual or mundane. Srila Rupa Gosvami confirms  this
in his  Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu  (1.2.251):  kintu  jïana-virakty-adi-sadhyam
bhaktyaiva sidhyati. “Indeed, only with the aid of  bhakti  can  one  attain
the fruits available through the cultivation of knowledge,  detachment,  and
so on.” The knowledge and detachment mentioned here are  not  those  related
with the Lord and His  devotional  service.  Indeed,  the  Bhagavatam  verse
quoted in this
TEXT (10.14.4) makes it explicit that knowledge  of  impersonal  Brahman  is
certainly among those items not related  to  the  Lord  and  His  devotional
service.
   Srimad-Bhagavatam  1.7.6  states,  anarthopasamam  saksad   bhakti-yogam:
“Bhakti-yoga directly mitigates  the  miseries  of  the  conditioned  soul.”
Srila Jiva Gosvami gives two explanations of the word saksat  (“direct”)  in
this context. He says that bhakti in  the  first  sense  is  sadhana-bhakti,
which, unaided by any other  process,  directly  removes  all  such  worldly
miseries as mental and physical disturbances  caused  by  the  dualities  of
heat and  cold.  However,  to  dispel  the  underlying  delusion  of  bodily
attachment we need bhakti in the second sense—namely, prema-bhakti, love  of
God, the fruit of sadhana-bhakti,
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva  Gosvami  discusses  the  prayojana-tattva  as  Vyasadeva
realized it.


===== TS.47 =====
NUMBER: 47
SOURCE LABEL: Text 47

TEXT 47.1
   atha purva-vad eva prayojanam ca spastayitum purvoktasya  purna-purusasya
ca Sri-krsna-svarupatvam vyaïjayitum grantha-phala-nirdesa-dvara tatra  tad-
anubhavantaram pratipadayann aha yasyam iti.  bhaktih  prema  sravana-rupaya
sadhana-bhaktya sadhyatvat.  utpadyate  avirbhavati.  tasyanusangikam  gunam
aha soketi. atraisam samskaro ’pi nasyatiti bhavah  `pritir  na  yavan  mayi
vasudeve na mucyate deha-yogena tavat' iti Sri-rsabhadeva-vakyat.
   Next, to clarify the final goal (prayojana), as described above [in Bhag.
1.7.4–6], and to affirm that the  purna-purusa  mentioned  above  [in  Bhag.
1.7.4] is in fact Lord  Krsna,  Suta  Gosvami  speaks  the  verse  beginning
yasyam [Bhag.  1.7.7].  While  describing  the  effect  of  hearing  Srimad-
Bhagavatam  in  this  verse,  he  reveals  another  of   Srila   Vyasadeva’s
realizations. In this verse the word bhakti refers to pure love of  Godhead,
because that is the goal achieved through executing the devotional  practice
of  hearing.  The  word  utpadyate  (“is  generated”)  here  means  “becomes
manifest.” And the manifestation of  pure  love  of  Godhead  is  soka-moha-
bhayapaha—that is, it destroys all  lamentation,  illusion,  and  fear,  the
implication being that even their subtle remnants  are  destroyed.  This  is
confirmed by the words of Sri Rsabhadeva:
   “Therefore, until one has love for Lord Vasudeva, who is none other  than
Myself, he is certainly not delivered from having to accept a material  body
again and again” [Bhag. 5.5.6].




   TEXT 47.2
   parama-puruse purvokta-purna-puruse. kim-akare ity apeksayam  aha  krsne.
krsnas  `tu  bhagavan  svayam'  ity-adi-sastra-sahasra-bhavitantah-karananam
paramparaya tat-prasiddhi-madhya-patinam casankhya-lokanam tan-nama-sravana-
matrena yah prathama-pratiti-visayah syat  tatha  tan-namnah  prathamaksara-
matram mantraya kalpyamanam  yasyabhimukhyaya  syat  tad-akare  ity  arthah.
ahus ca nama-kaumudi-karah  `krsna-sabdasya  tamala-syamala-tvisi  yasodayah
stanan-dhaye para-brahmani rudhih' iti.
   In this verse [Bhag. 1.7.7] the  word  parama-puruse  (“for  the  Supreme
Person”) refers to  the  same  purna-purusa  (“complete  person”)  mentioned
earlier [Bhag. 1.7.4]. What is His form? To this Sri Suta  Gosvami  replies,
“Krsna.” In other words, for those whose hearts are enriched with  thousands
of scriptural statements such as krsnas tu bhagavan svayam  (“Krsna  is  the
original Personality of Godhead”; [Bhag. 1.3.28]), and  for  those  who  are
attracted to His glories and fame by hearing through a bona  fide  disciplic
succession, as soon as they hear His name their minds are  filled  with  His
presence. And as soon as such persons chant the first syllable of  His  name
while uttering His mantra,  the  Lord’s  attention  is  also  drawn  to  the
chanter. That is the form denoted by the word Krsna  in  this  verse  [Bhag.
1.7.7]. This is confirmed by the author of Nama-kaumudi:  “The  conventional
meanings of the name Krsna are ‘one who is black like a  tamala  tree,’  ‘He
who was breast-fed by Sri Yasoda,’ and ‘the Supreme Brahman.’”


   COMMENTARY
   Devotional Service Frees One from All Material Miseries
   In
   TEXT 45 Srila Jiva  Gosvami  summarized  Srila  Vyasadeva’s  realizations
concerning prayojana-tattva. Suta Gosvami reaffirms  these  realizations  in
Bhagavatam 1.7.7, where he states that just by listening to  the  Bhagavatam
one will attain love of Godhead. Bhakti here must refer to love  of  Godhead
and not  sadhana-bhakti,  devotional  service  in  practice,  since  hearing
Srimad-Bhagavatam is itself the sadhana. In this verse  the  verb  utpadyate
(“is generated”) means not that love of God is  created  anew  but  that  it
becomes manifest in the heart. Because love of God is His internal  potency,
it is never created.
   As a concomitant effect of love of God, the devotee  is  freed  from  all
lamentation, illusion, and  fear.  Indeed,  even  their  dormant  seeds  are
destroyed, so powerful is love of Krsna. The root cause of a  jiva’s  misery
is his forgetfulness of the Lord, but when he attains love of God  He  never
forgets the Lord.
   One who attains love for Krsna loses  interest  in  all  kinds  of  other
pleasures, including even the  bliss  of  impersonal  realization.  All  his
doubts are vanquished and all his desires completely satisfied. Nothing  can
disturb him or deviate his mind from  devotional  service.  In  this  regard
Srila Rupa Gosvami writes (Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu 1.2. 58):
   tatrapy ekantinam srestha govinda-hrta-manasah
   yesam Srisa-prasado ’pi mano hartum na saknuyat
“Among the various kinds of unalloyed devotees of the  Lord,  the  best  are
those whose hearts have  been  captivated  by  Lord  Govinda.  Indeed,  such
devotees have no attraction or desire even for the favor of  Lord  Narayana,
the husband of the supreme goddess of fortune.”
   A side benefit of such  pure  love  for  Krsna,  as  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami
mentions in
   TEXT 47.1, is that even the seeds of lamentation, illusion, and fear  are
destroyed. These seeds are rooted deeply in the soil of  bodily  attachment,
and by quoting Lord Rsabhadeva  here  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  emphasizes  that
there is no way to eradicate this bodily attachment other than  by  becoming
attached to Krsna. And one can easily attain this  prayojana  of  attachment
to Krsna by  hearing  Srimad-Bhagavatam.  Vyasadeva  saw  all  this  in  His
trance.
   Krsna, referred to in Bhagavatam  1.7.7  as  parama-purusa,  the  Supreme
Person, is identical with the purna-purusa whom Vyasa  saw  along  with  His
potencies. In
   TEXT 30 Srila Jiva Gosvami has already explained that  this  purna-purusa
is the original Personality of  Godhead.  Now  he  identifies  that  Supreme
Person as Lord Sri Krsna.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami next explains  who  that  Krsna  is.  History  records
various Krsnas. For example, Arjuna was  also  called  Krsna,  as  shown  in
Bhagavatam 1.8.43, where Srimati Kuntidevi addresses Lord  Krsna  as  Krsna-
sakha, “the friend of Krsna [Arjuna].”  And  Vyasadeva  was  also  sometimes
called Krsna. Nonetheless, as soon as Vaisnavas  coming  in  the  authorized
lines  of  disciplic  succession  hear  the  word  “Krsna,”  the  form  that
immediately comes to mind is Lord Krsna’s, not Arjuna’s or Vyasa’s  or  that
of any other ancient or modern person of the same name. According  to  Srila
Baladeva  Vidyabhusana,  this  is  the  spontaneous  experience  of  eminent
personalities like Suta Gosvami, Saunaka Rsi,  and  Jayadeva  Gosvami.  Thus
the normal, conventional meaning of the name Krsna is  the  two-handed  Lord
Krsna who appeared as a cowherd in Vraja.
   As we have described above, words may have various secondary meanings  in
addition to their primary ones. The primary meaning of a word is  the  image
that comes to the mind upon first hearing or reading it, before any  related
thought or analysis can modify its meaning. Thus the primary meaning of  the
name “Krsna” is Lord Sri Krsna, the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  Sri
Laksmidhara Pandita, while commenting on the meanings of  various  names  of
the Lord in his Nama-kaumudi, defines “Krsna” as “He who is black  like  the
tamala tree.” In Vaisnava literature Krsna’s bodily hue is often likened  to
the color of the tamala tree, which  is  commonly  found  in  the  Vrndavana
area.  Just  defining  Krsna’s  complexion,   however,   leaves   open   the
possibility that the Krsna referred to is the son of Devaki in  Mathura  and
Dvaraka. Therefore Laksmidhara further specifies the  meaning  as  “the  one
who was suckled by Srimati  Yasoda.”  This  fixes  the  primary  meaning  of
“Krsna” as the young cowherd son of Yasoda in  Vrndavana,  since  the  older
Krsna of Mathura does not drink  Mother  Yasoda’s  breast  milk.  If  doubts
still linger about this Krsna’s being the  Supreme  Lord—since  there  could
always be someone else  named  Krsna  from  Vrndavana  who  has  a  blackish
complexion and a mother named Yasoda—Laksmidhara further limits the  meaning
of “Krsna” to “the Supreme Brahman,” the Personality of Godhead.
   In Sanskrit, words have a derived meaning (yaugika), which may  sometimes
differ from their conventional usage (rudhi).  The  rudhi,  or  conventional
meaning, is  always  the  primary  meaning.  In  cases  where  the  primary,
conventional meaning differs from the derived meaning, the  primary  meaning
always takes precedence: yogad rudhir baliyasi. In  the  case  of  the  name
“Krsna,” the derived meaning is also the Supreme Person, as the  Mahabharata
(Udyoga-parva 70.5) explains:
   krsir bhu-vacakam sabdo nas ca nirvrti-vacakah
   visnus tad-bhava-yogac ca krsno bhavati sasvatah
“The syllable ‘krs’ denotes existence, and the syllable ‘na’ denotes  bliss.
The eternal Lord Krsna is also always Visnu in both these senses.”
   The Amara-kosa Sanskrit dictionary (1.18) states, visnur narayanah  krsno
vaikuntho vistara-sravah: “The names Visnu, Narayana, Krsna,  and  Vaikuntha
are synonymous.” One may say that  these  are  names  of  Visnu,  but  after
listing  thirty-nine  such  names,  the  Amara-kosa  states,  vasudevo  ’sya
janakah: “His father is Vasudeva.”  By  way  of  further  confirmation  that
Krsna is supreme, the author  then  immediately  lists  the  names  of  Lord
Balarama, Krsna’s brother.
   Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana quotes the following verse in his
   COMMENTARY  on Sri  Visnu-sahasra-nama  (20),  while  defining  the  name
“Krsna”:
   krsir bhu-vacakah sabdo nas ca nirvrti-samjïakah
   tayor aikyam param brahma krsna ity abhidhiyate
“The syllable ‘krs’ means ‘existence,’ and the syllable ‘na’ means  ‘bliss.’
The  combination  of  these  two  is  ‘Krsna,’  the  name  of  the   Supreme
Personality of Godhead” (Gopala-tapani Up., Purva 1.1).  In  this  way  both
the conventional and the derived  meanings  of  the  name  “Krsna”  are  the
same—the two-handed cowherd boy who is the son of  Mother  Yasoda  and  also
the Supreme Godhead. Since  Vyasadeva  saw  this  particular  Krsna  in  His
trance, the ultimate goal of life must be to attain love of Krsna.
   The next point Srila Jiva Gosvami makes is that when the  word  Krsna  is
uttered in a mantra, as in the Hare Krsna maha-mantra, this  sound  attracts
the attention of Lord Krsna Himself the very moment the  first  syllable  is
vibrated. This is so because the name “Krsna” is identical with  the  person
Krsna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. For verification we  can  examine
the experience of many realized souls who attained  perfection  by  chanting
the Hare Krsna mantra.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami explains that the  bliss  derived  from  love  of
Godhead is far superior to that derived from impersonal realization.


===== TS.48 =====
NUMBER: 48
SOURCE LABEL: Text 48

TEXT 48
   atha   tasyaiva   prayojanasya   brahmanandanubhavad    api    paramatvam
anubhutavan. yatas tadrsam  sukam  api  tad-ananda-vaisistya-lambhanaya  tam
adhyapayam asety aha sa samhitam iti. krtvanukramya ceti prathamatah  svayam
sanksepena krtva pascat tu Sri-naradopadesad  anukramena  vivrtyety  arthah.
ata  eva  Srimad-bhagavatam  bharatanantara-krtam  yad  atra   sruyate   yac
canyatrastadasa-purananantaram bharatam iti tad dvayam api  samahitam  syat.
brahmanandanubhava-nimagnatvan  nivrtti-niratam  sarvato  nivrttau   niratam
tatravyabhicarinam apity arthah.
   Srila Vyasadeva experienced that this final goal [the bliss of pure  love
of God]  is  superior  to  even  brahmananda,  the  happiness  derived  from
realizing the impersonal  aspect  of  the  Supreme.  This  we  know  because
Vyasadeva taught Sukadeva Gosvami Srimad-Bhagavatam so he  could  taste  the
special bliss derived  from  love  of  Godhead,  even  though  Sukadeva  was
already absorbed in brahmananda. Suta  Gosvami  states  this  in  the  verse
beginning sa samhitam [Bhag. 1.7.8]. In this verse the phrase  krtvanukramya
(“after compiling  and  revising”)  indicates  that  Vyasadeva  first  wrote
Srimad-Bhagavatam in an abbreviated form and  that  later  on,  after  being
instructed by Sri Narada Muni, He  expanded  and  rearranged  it.  Thus  two
apparently contradictory statements are reconciled—one found  here  [in  the
Bhagavatam] saying that the Bhagavatam was composed after  the  Mahabharata,
and the other found elsewhere [the  Skanda  Purana,  Prabhasa-khanda  2.94],
saying that the Mahabharata was compiled after  the  eighteen  Puranas.  The
word nivrtti-nirata (“attached to renunciation”)  implies  that  because  of
his absorption in the bliss of Brahman, Sri Sukadeva was living  a  life  of
complete renunciation, from which he never deviated.


   COMMENTARY
   Love of God Is Superior to the Bliss of Brahman
   One of Srila Vyasadeva’s most profound realizations described in  Srimad-
Bhagavatam was that bhakty-ananda, the bliss derived from  rendering  loving
devotional service to Krsna, is superior to brahmananda, the  bliss  derived
from merging into the impersonal Brahman. Srila Rupa Gosvami  confirms  this
superiority in his Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu (1.1.38):
   brahmanando bhaved esa cet parardha-guni-krtah
   naiti bhakti-sukhambhodheh paramanu-tulam api
“Even if the happiness of Brahman realization  is  multiplied  trillions  of
times, it would not equal even a single drop  of  the  ocean  of  the  bliss
derived from devotional service.”  Indeed,  the  bliss  of  pure  devotional
service always minimizes the happiness of Brahman realization.
   A father naturally wants to give His son the  best  thing  he  has.  Thus
Srila Vyasadeva taught Srimad-Bhagavatam  to  Sukadeva  Gosvami.  But  being
Vyasadeva’s son was not Sukadeva’s only qualification.  Perfectly  fixed  in
renunciation, he had no material desires (nivrtti-niratam). In other  words,
he had no ulterior motive  that  would  have  led  him  to  misconstrue  the
meaning of Srimad-Bhagavatam for material gain, either gross or  subtle.  It
is for this reason that  Srila  Vyasadeva  regarded  Sukadeva  as  the  most
qualified of His disciples to hear the Bhagavatam, and by choosing  him  for
this great honor Vyasadeva set the standard  for  all  future  students  and
speakers of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   In this
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami also resolves a controversy concerning the  order
in which the Srimad-Bhagavatam and the Mahabharata  were  composed.  In  the
passage beginning with the following two verses, the Bhagavatam itself  says
it was composed after the Mahabharata:
   stri-sudra-dvija-bandhunam trayi na sruti-gocara
   karma-sreyasi mudhanam sreya evam bhaved iha
   iti bharatam akhyanam krpaya munina krtam


   evam pravrttasya sada bhutanam sreyasi dvijah
   sarvatmakenapi yada natusyad dhrdayam tatah
“Out of compassion, the great sage thought it  wise  to  do  something  that
would enable even those who were ignorant  of  how  to  act  for  their  own
welfare to achieve the ultimate goal of life. Thus  He  compiled  the  great
historical  narration  called  the  Mahabharata  for  women,  laborers,  and
friends of the twice-born because they do not have access to  the  Vedas.  O
twice-born brahmanas, still His mind was not satisfied, although He  engaged
himself in working for the total welfare of all people” (Bhag. 1.4.25–26).
   When Vyasa was thus feeling dissatisfied, Narada Muni came and  requested
Him to compose Srimad-Bhagavatam. Elsewhere, however, it is stated that  the
Mahabharata  was  spoken  after   all   eighteen   Puranas.   Sri   Baladeva
Vidyabhusana, in his
   COMMENTARY  on this
   TEXT of the Tattva-sandarbha, cites the Matsya Purana (53.70):
   astadasa-puranani krtva satyavati-sutah
   cakre bharatam akhyanam vedarthair upabrmhitam
“After compiling the eighteen Puranas,  Vyasadeva,  the  son  of  Satyavati,
composed the great history called the Mahabharata, which serves as a
COMMENTARY  on the Vedas.”
   To resolve this apparent contradiction  in  the  chronology,  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami explains that Srila Vyasadeva originally composed the Bhagavatam  in
an abbreviated form. Later He compiled the great history called  Mahabharata
out of compassion for those who cannot  study  the  Vedas.  But  even  after
completing  this  great  epic,  Vyasa  still  felt  a  void  in  His  heart.
Thereafter Narada Muni instructed Him to produce a new, expanded edition  of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, the one currently available.
   Moreover, from Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.3.43, quoted below, we can  understand
that this later edition was composed after Lord Krsna’s  disappearance  from
the earth. Earlier Vyasa had composed the Mahabharata  for  the  welfare  of
people in the  grip  of  Kali.  Pariksit  Maharaja’s  chastisement  of  Kali
occurred after the dialogue between Narada Muni and Srila  Vyasadeva,  since
it was the spread of Kali’s influence that  had  saddened  Vyasa.  Prior  to
Kali’s appearance Vyasadeva had no reason to feel dissatisfied,  since  Lord
Krsna was still present along with all religious principles. The  Bhagavatam
(1.3.43) confirms that this later edition  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  manifested
before the brahmana boy Srngi had cursed Maharaja Pariksit,  an  event  that
occurred after the disappearance of Lord Sri Krsna:
   krsne sva-dhamopagate dharma-jïanadibhih saha
   kalau nasta-drsam esa puranarko ’dhunoditah
“This Bhagavata Purana is as brilliant as the sun, and it  has  arisen  just
after the  departure  of  Lord  Krsna  to  His  own  abode,  accompanied  by
religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost  their  vision  due  to  the
dense darkness of ignorance in the Age of Kali shall  get  light  from  this
Purana.” In this connection we can also refer  to  the  statements  of  Suta
Gosvami in the First Canto, Chapter Four.
   We can summarize the chronology of the Vedic literature in  Kali-yuga  as
follows: First Srila Vyasadeva edited  the  one  Veda,  the  original  Yajur
Veda, into four Vedas. He then  abridged  the  one  billion  verses  of  the
Puranas into  eighteen  Puranas  consisting  of  a  total  of  four  hundred
thousand  verses.  These  included  Srimad-Bhagavatam   in   its   original,
abbreviated form. Then Vyasa composed  His  epic  work,  Mahabharata,  after
which He distilled the essence of the Vedas, Puranas, and  Mahabharata  into
the Vedanta-sutra. Finally He composed His most  significant  work  of  all,
Srimad-Bhagavatam, which is Vyasadeva’s own
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra.
   Some  traditional  scholars  believe  there  were  two  versions  of  the
Mahabharata. They say it was first compiled soon  after  the  Vedas  in  one
hundred sections, and later Veda-vyasa reduced  it  to  a  hundred  thousand
verses in eighteen  sections  after  compiling  the  eighteen  Puranas.  The
Mahabharata’s Adi-parva (10.5) states that Srila Vyasa  compiled  a  samhita
with six million verses, of which He gave  one  hundred  thousand  to  human
beings. This Mahabharata was first recited by the sage Vaisampayana to  King
Janamejaya, Pariksit’s son. Another reference traditional scholars  give  to
support their contention that there were two versions of the Mahabharata  is
the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad verse cited in
   TEXT 12 (B.a. Up. 2.4.10)  This  verse  lists  the  scriptures  that  the
Supreme Lord breathed out, including the Itihasas, which are  listed  before
the Puranas.
   Next Srila Jiva Gosvami  shows  that  Srila  Vyasadeva’s  realization  in
trance constitutes the epitome of all philosophies,  as  confirmed  by  Suta
Gosvami.


===== TS.49 =====
NUMBER: 49
SOURCE LABEL: Text 49

TEXT 49.1
   tam    etam    Sri-veda-vyasaya     samadhi-jatanubhavam     Sri-saunaka-
prasnottaratvena  visadayan  sarvatmaramanubhavena  sa-hetukam   samvadayaty
atmaramas ceti. nirgrantha  vidhi-nisedhatita  nirgatahankara-granthayo  va.
ahaitukim phalabhisandhi-rahitam. atra sarvaksepa-pariharartham aha  ittham-
bhuta atmaramanam apy akarsana-svabhavo guno yasya sa iti.
   In reply to a question posed by Sri Saunaka [Bhag. 1.7.9],  Suta  Gosvami
speaks the verse beginning atmaramas ca [Bhag. 1.7.10],  further  explaining
what Srila Vyasadeva experienced in trance and showing logically how  it  is
consistent with the experience of all sages who take pleasure in  the  self.
In this verse the  word  nirgranthah  (“free  from  bondage”)  means  either
“beyond the rules and regulations described  in  the  scriptures”  or  “free
from the knot of false ego.” The word  ahaitukim  (“causeless”)  means  “not
desiring any results.” And to put an end  to  all  doubts,  Sri  Suta  says,
“Indeed, the nature of Lord Hari is such that even atmaramas feel  attracted
to Him.”


   TEXT 49.2
   tam evartham Sri-sukasyapy anubhavena samvadayati harer guneti. Sri-veda-
vyasa-devad  yat  kiïcic  chrutena  harer  gunena   purvam   aksipta   matir
brahmanandanubhavo yasya sah. pascad adhyagad mahad vistirnam iti. tatas  ca
tat-sankatha-sauhardena nityam visnu-janah priya yasya tatha-bhuto va  tesam
priyo va svayam  abhavad  ity  arthah.  ayam  bhavo  brahma-vaivartanusarena
purvam  tavad  ayam  garbha-vasam  arabhya  Sri-krsnasya  svairitaya   maya-
nivarakatvam   jïatavan.   tatah   sva-niyojanaya    Sri-vyasa-devenanitasya
tasyantar-darsanat tan-nivarane sati krtartham manyataya svayam ekantam  eva
gatavan. tatra Sri-veda-vyasas tu tam vasi-kartum  tad-ananya-sadhanam  Sri-
bhagavatam  eva  jïatva  tad-gunatisaya-prakasa-mayams  tadiya-padya-visesan
kathaïcic chravayitva tena  tam  aksipta-matim  krtva  tad  eva  purnam  tam
adhyapayam aseti bhagavata-mahimatisayah proktah.
   In  the  next  verse  (beginning  harer  guna-;  [Bhag.  1.7.11]),   Suta
reiterates this idea by relating Sukadeva Gosvami’s experience. First,  when
Sukadeva Gosvami heard Srila Vyasadeva  recite  a  few  selected  Bhagavatam
verses describing Lord Hari’s attributes,  Sukadeva’s  attention  was  drawn
away from the bliss of impersonal Brahman  and  his  heart  was  captivated.
Later Sukadeva studied the complete Bhagavatam, despite its vast  size.  And
thereafter Lord Visnu’s devotees became very dear to him, his affection  for
them growing as he daily discussed the Lord’s pastimes with  them.  Or  else
the word visnu-jana-priya means that he became dear to them.
   The purport is as follows: The Brahma-vaivarta Purana[13] relates how Sri
Sukadeva, even while in the womb of  his  mother,  realized  that  Lord  Sri
Krsna  could  completely  dispel  Maya’s  influence   by   virtue   of   His
independence. Subsequently, on Sukadeva’s  request,  Vyasadeva  brought  the
Lord to His hermitage, and when Sukadeva saw Lord Krsna before him  even  as
he lay within the womb, he became free from  Maya’s  influence.  Considering
his life successful, Sukadeva  at  once  departed  alone.  Thereafter  Srila
Vyasadeva,  knowing  that  He  could  control  Sukadeva  only  with  Srimad-
Bhagavatam,  somehow  made  him  hear  some   selected   Bhagavatam   verses
describing Lord Krsna’s  superexcellent  characteristics.  In  this  way  He
captivated Sukadeva’s heart, and later He taught him the  entire  narrative.
Thus is declared the supreme glory of Srimad-Bhagavatam.


   TEXT 49.3
   tad evam darsitam vaktuh Sri-sukasya Sri-veda-vyasasya ca samana-hrdayam.
tasmad vaktur hrdayanurupam eva sarvatra tatparyam paryalocaniyam  nanyatha.
yad   yat   tad-anyatha   paryalocanam   tatra   tatra   kupatha-gamitaiveti
nistankitam. Sri-sutah.
   From the above we can see that the speaker (Sukadeva Gosvami)  and  Srila
Vyasadeva had the same realizations. And therefore we  should  always  study
the message of Srimad-Bhagavatam in the light  of  Sukadeva’s  realizations,
not  otherwise.  By  implication,   we   should   consider   any   different
interpretation  merely  speculative  and  thus  deviant  from  the   correct
understanding.
   The verse under discussion [Bhag. 1.7.11] was spoken by Sri Suta Gosvami.


   COMMENTARY
   Srimad-Bhagavatam Attracts Even Atmaramas
   To explain the essence of Srimad-Bhagavatam, in
   TEXT 29 Jiva Gosvami  first  analyzed  the  Bhagavatam’s  description  of
Sukadeva’s heart. Then he analyzed Srila Vyasadeva’s experience  in  trance,
on the basis of which Vyasa wrote Srimad-Bhagavatam. Jiva Gosvami  concludes
the discussion of the present
   TEXT by confirming the outcome of these analyses with the  words  of  Sri
Suta Gosvami in Srimad-Bhagavatam 1.7.10, the famous “atmarama verse.”  What
follows is a list of the major points to be derived from his analysis:
   1. The Personality of Godhead is endowed with multifarious  potencies  in
three categories—internal, external, and marginal.
   2. The chief and original form is Sri Krsna,  but  Krsna  also  manifests
countless other expansions.
   3. Neither the Supreme Lord’s Supersoul manifestations nor the impersonal
Brahman are independent of Him.
   4. The finite living entities are different  from  the  Supreme  Lord  in
their personal identity; they can never be  one  with  Him  in  an  absolute
sense.
   5. Maya is the  external  energy  of  the  Lord,  deluding  those  living
entities who turn their backs on Him.
   6. Maya is a devotee of the Lord and is always subservient to Him.
   7. Maya cannot influence the Lord and His internal potencies.
   8.  The  jivas  can  become  free  from  the  bondage  of  Maya  only  by
surrendering to the Lord and engaging in His devotional service.
   9. Hearing the Srimad-Bhagavatam is devotional service to  the  Lord  and
can thus end the jiva’s miseries.
   10. The bliss one derives by engaging in devotional service to  the  Lord
is so superior to the happiness derived from the realization  of  impersonal
Brahman that even self-satisfied sages (atmaramas) become attracted  to  the
Lord’s attributes and pastimes.
   11. The purpose of human life is to attain love of God, the mature  fruit
of devotional service in practice (sadhana-bhakti).
   12. Devotional service is supremely independent, like the Personality  of
Godhead; it does  not  need  the  support  of  any  other  method  of  self-
realization.
   When Suta Gosvami finished describing Srila Vyasadeva’s  trance,  Saunaka
Rsi asked him, “If Sukadeva Gosvami  was  completely  renounced,  having  no
interest in anything by virtue of being absorbed in the bliss of  the  self,
what caused him to study this lengthy Bhagavata Purana?”
   Suta Gosvami replied  with  these  two  verses  (Bhag.  1.7.10–11):  “All
different varieties of atmaramas (those who take pleasure in  the  atma,  or
spirit self), especially those established on the path of  self-realization,
though freed from all kinds of material bondage, desire to render  unalloyed
devotional service unto the Personality of  Godhead.  This  means  that  the
Lord possesses transcendental qualities and therefore can attract  everyone,
including liberated souls. The heart of the  transcendentally  powerful  Sri
Sukadeva Gosvami was captivated when he heard a description of  Lord  Hari’s
attributes and pastimes, and therefore he undertook the study of this  great
narration, Srimad-Bhagavatam. This made him very dear  to  the  devotees  of
Lord Visnu.”
   By this answer Suta  Gosvami  confirms  all  the  realizations  of  Srila
Vyasadeva and Sukadeva Gosvami. First Suta states a general principle,  that
many self-satisfied persons, although liberated from material  bondage,  are
still eager to engage in Krsna  consciousness.  Then  he  mentions  Sukadeva
Gosvami as a specific instance of this principle’s  application.  Thus  Suta
Gosvami establishes that Sukadeva Gosvami was not the only liberated  person
who became attracted  to  the  Personality  of  Godhead’s  service.  On  the
contrary, Sukadeva’s experience  is  corroborated  by  that  of  many  other
atmaramas, demonstrating that the only  reason  why  one  would  reject  the
bliss of Brahman realization and take up  devotional  service  must  be  the
wonderful, all-attractive attributes of Lord Hari.
   By this explanation Srila Jiva Gosvami shows conclusively  that  Sukadeva
Gosvami, Srila Vyasadeva, and Suta Gosvami  shared  the  same  realizations.
Therefore these realizations should form the basis of any genuine study  and
interpretation of  Srimad-Bhagavatam.  Interpretations  based  on  something
else must be considered deviant from the scripture’s intended meaning.
   In
   TEXT 27 Srila Jiva Gosvami disclosed that Sridhara  Svami  inserted  some
impersonalistic ideas into his
   COMMENTARY  on Srimad-Bhagavatam. Sridhara Svami did this as a  preaching
strategy to attract the Mayavadis to the Bhagavata philosophy. Jiva  Gosvami
said there that in such instances he would give his own explanations.
   A recent scholar has criticized  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  for  this  policy,
labeling  him  an  opportunist  who  accepted  only  those  statements  that
supported his opinion and belittled others by declaring that they were  made
with  ulterior  motives  and  did  not  actually  express  Sridhara  Svami’s
opinions. This scholar suggests that Jiva Gosvami is not a true follower  of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who  highly  revered  Sridhara  Svami’s  Bhavartha-
dipika.
   But in this
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami further clarifies  his  policy:  He  accepts  any
explanation that complements the realization of  Srila  Vyasadeva,  Sukadeva
Gosvami, and Suta Gosvami—namely that pure devotional service to Lord  Krsna
is the ultimate goal of life. That this policy reflects the real  desire  of
Lord Caitanya will be recognized by everyone who  knows  that  Sri  Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was the leading opponent of impersonalism in His time. In  debate
He  defeated  two  of  the  leading  Mayavadis  of  His  time,  Prakasananda
Sarasvati  and  Vasudeva  Sarvabhauma,  and  He  frequently  condemned   the
Mayavada interpretation of the Vedanta-sutra. In light of His teachings  and
example, for Him to embrace a Mayavadi
   COMMENTARY  on Srimad-Bhagavatam is unlikely and not at all credible.
   Vaisnavas coming in  disciplic  succession  do  not  have  the  slightest
confusion on this point. Lord Caitanya revered Sridhara Svami’s
   COMMENTARY  for two reasons: first, because Sridhara was in fact a  great
Vaisnava, and second, because his
   COMMENTARY  kept the  natural  sense  of  the  Bhagavatam  and  with  its
conclusions  supported  the  Vaisnava  siddhanta.  Therefore  it  should  be
obvious to anyone who reads his
   COMMENTARY  that whatever impersonal explanations Sridhara Svami gave did
not express his true heart. For  example,  while  commenting  on  the  first
verse  of  the  Bhagavatam   he   states,   Srimad-bhagavad-guna-anuvarnana-
pradhanam  bhagavata-sastram:  “Srimad-Bhagavatam  was  written  chiefly  to
provide descriptions of the Supreme Lord’s qualities.” In  the  next  verse,
while commenting on the word vastavam, he  writes,  vastava-sabdena  vastuno
’mso jivah, vastunah saktir maya  ca,  vastunah  karyam  jagat,  tat  sarvam
vastv eva: “The word  vastava  indicates  that  the  jiva  is  part  of  the
Absolute, that Maya is the energy of the Absolute,  and  that  the  material
world is the creation of the Absolute. All this  is  real.”  This  and  many
similar statements throughout Sridhara Svami’s Bhagavatam
   COMMENTARY  make foolish any doubt about his status as a  pure  Vaisnava.
And it is equally foolish to criticize Srila Jiva Gosvami for not using  the
impersonalistic portions of Sridhara’s
   COMMENTARY  here in his Sat-sandarbha.
   One can fathom the  true  essence  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  only  from  the
viewpoint of Sri Vyasa and Sukadeva  Gosvami.  Because  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami
held this opinion, he is a  true  scholar  of  the  Bhagavatam  and  a  true
follower of Sri Caitanya, who desired to see the Bhagavatam  established  as
the final word in philosophy throughout the world. Jiva Gosvami was  neither
a blind follower of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu nor a  blind  scholar  foolishly
trying to understand the supreme scripture without  accepting  the  standard
authorities in disciplic succession.
   Jiva Gosvami was the leading disciple of Srila  Rupa  Gosvami  and  Srila
Sanatana Gosvami, two principal followers  of  Sri  Caitanyadeva.  The  Lord
personally instructed them in the science of devotional service and  ordered
them to write books setting forth His precepts. This  they  did  in  a  most
wonderful  way,  explaining  the  intricacies  of  bhakti-yoga  so  that  no
follower  in  their  line  would  have  to  speculate  or  misinterpret  the
teachings of Lord Caitanya. Rupa and Sanatana personally trained Srila  Jiva
Gosvami in Krsna consciousness. They were so  pleased  with  him  that  they
made him the editor of many of their books. We have  no  reason,  therefore,
to doubt that Srila Jiva Gosvami loyally followed in the footsteps of  Srila
Rupa and Sanatana Gosvamis and therefore  of  Lord  Caitanya.  The  ultimate
proof of this is that one can find no contradictions  between  the  writings
of Rupa and Sanatana and those of  Jiva  Gosvami.  Indeed,  earlier  in  Sri
Tattva-sandarbha Jiva Gosvami declared that he was writing this  work  under
their order. Moreover, he succeeded Srila  Rupa  and  Sanatana  Gosvamis  as
leader of the Gaudiya Vaisnavas  in  Vrndavana,  Bengal,  and  Orissa.  This
universal recognition of his leadership was explicit acknowledgment  of  his
stature as a dedicated follower of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
   We learn from Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.2.2) that Sukadeva  Gosvami  left  his
father’s house  immediately  after  his  birth.  According  to  the  Brahma-
vaivarta Purana, when Sukadeva was still  in  his  mother’s  womb  he  could
understand the peril of living in the material  world,  the  risk  of  being
captivated by Maya. He also knew that Krsna can counter Maya’s  charms,  and
therefore he  forced  his  father,  Vyasadeva,  to  bring  Lord  Krsna  from
Dvaraka. Sukadeva then made the Lord Himself promise  to  protect  him  from
Maya.  Only  then  did  Sukadeva  agree  to  take  birth,  and  even  so  he
immediately left home to enter the forest. Out of natural affection for  His
son, Srila Vyasadeva followed him, calling him to come  back.  But  Sukadeva
was completely unattached to material life and  paid  his  father  no  heed.
Vyasadeva was deeply disappointed, since He wanted to teach Sukadeva Srimad-
Bhagavatam. To entice him to return home, Vyasa had some  of  His  disciples
recite verses from the Bhagavatam  whenever  they  went  to  the  forest  to
collect firewood.  Once  when  they  were  singing  these  verses,  Sukadeva
Gosvami heard them. At once his heart was captivated, and  he  followed  the
students back to Sri Vyasa. Then Sukadeva, who had  already  put  aside  his
attachment  to  the  impersonal  Brahman,  learned  the   complete   Srimad-
Bhagavatam from Srila Vyasadeva.
   At present there is no scriptural reference indicating which  verses  Sri
Sukadeva heard that captivated him, but some Vaisnava  scholars  state  that
they included the following three:
   yam manyase matuleyam priyam mitram suhrt-tamam
   akaroh sacivam dutam sauhrdad atha sarathim
“O King, that personality whom, out of ignorance only,  you  thought  to  be
your  maternal  cousin,  your  very  dear  friend,  well-wisher,  counselor,
messenger, benefactor, etc.,  is  that  very  Personality  of  Godhead,  Sri
Krsna” (Bhag. 1.9.20).
   @vpl1 = aho baki yam stana-kala-kutam
   @vpl2 = jighamsayapayayad apy asadhvi
   @vpl1 = lebhe gatim dhatry-ucitam tato ’nyam
   @vpl2 = kam va dayalum saranam vrajema
“Alas, how shall I take shelter of one more merciful than  He  [Krsna],  who
granted the position of mother to the  she-demon  Putana  although  she  was
unfaithful and she prepared deadly poison to be  sucked  from  her  breast?”
(Bhag. 3.2.23)
   @vpl1 = barhapidam nata-vara-vapuh karnayoh karnikaram
   @vpl2 = bibhrad vasah kanaka-kapisam vaijayantim ca malam
   @vpl1 = randhran venor adhara-sudhayapurayan gopa-vrndair
   @vpl2 = vrndaranyam sva-pada-ramanam pravisad gita-kirtih
“Wearing a peacock-feather ornament upon His head,  blue  karnikara  flowers
on His ears, a yellow  garment  as  brilliant  as  gold,  and  a  Vaijayanti
garland, Lord Krsna exhibited His transcendental form  as  the  greatest  of
dancers as He entered the forest  of  Vrndavana,  beautifying  it  with  the
marks of His footprints. He filled the holes of His flute  with  the  nectar
of His lips, and the cowherd boys sang His glories” (Bhag. 10.21.5).
   These verses describe Lord Krsna’s love for His devotees, His mercy  even
toward His enemies, and His incomparable charm and beauty.
   The history of Sukadeva Gosvami described in the Mahabharata differs from
that narrated above. Baladeva Vidyabhusana explains that  the  two  accounts
describe events from different days of Lord Brahma.
   Having ascertained the prameya of  Srimad-Bhagavatam—that  is,  what  one
should learn from it—Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  next  says  something  about  the
format of Sri Sat-sandarbha.


===== TS.50 =====
NUMBER: 50
SOURCE LABEL: Text 50

TEXT 50
   atha kramena vistaratas tathaiva  tatparyam  nirnetum  sambandhabhidheya-
prayojanesu  sadbhih  sandarbhair  nirnesyamanesu  prathamam  yasya   vacya-
vacakata-sambandhidam sastram tad eva `dharmah projjhita-kaitavah'  ity-adi-
padye samanyakaratas tavad aha `vedyam vastavam atra  vastu'  iti.  tika  ca
`atra Srimati sundare bhagavate vastavam paramartha-bhutam vastu  vedyam  na
tu vaisesikadi-vad dravya-gunadi-rupam' ity esa. Sri-veda-vyasah.
   Hereafter, to delineate systematically  and  thoroughly  the  message  of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, we shall explain in these six Sandarbhas  the  principles
of sambandha, abhidheya, and prayojana, one  after  the  other.  This  first
book, Tattva-sandarbha, discusses the connection between the  subject  being
described and the
   TEXT describing it. This connection is mentioned  in  general  terms  [in
Bhagavatam 1.1.2] with the words vedyam vastavam atra vastu: “Here the  real
reality is to be known.”  Commenting  on  this  part  of  the  verse,  Srila
Sridhara Svami writes, “Here  in  this  beautiful  Bhagavatam  the  ultimate
reality in its highest manifestation is to be known, not  reality  in  terms
merely of substance, qualities, and so on, as taught by the  Vaisesikas  and
others.”
   This verse [Bhag. 1.1.2] is spoken by Sri Veda-vyasa.


   COMMENTARY
   The Subject of the Sat-sandarbha
   Here Srila Jiva Gosvami informs us that in the  six  Sandarbhas  he  will
explain in great detail the  same  sambandha-,  abhidheya-,  and  prayojana-
tattvas that  Sri  Vyasadeva  and  Sukadeva  Gosvami  realized.  He  briefly
mentioned them in Texts 8 and 9, and now he will elaborate on  them  on  the
basis of Srimad-Bhagavatam. The Tattva-, Bhagavat-, Paramatma-,  and  Krsna-
sandarbhas treat the sambanda-tattva.  The  Bhakti-sandarbha  discusses  the
abhidheya-tattva, the Priti-sandarbha the prayojana-tattva.
   The Tattva-sandarbha introduces the subject matter of the six  Sandarbhas
by establishing the authority  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  and  saying  something
about its origin and content. As mentioned earlier, the  relationship  of  a
subject with its  description  is  technically  called  the  vacya-vacakata-
sambandha. The subject of Srimad-Bhagavatam is revealed in its  very  second
verse:  vedyam  vastavam  atra  vastu.  “The  absolute   reality   is   made
understandable herein.” As we have already discussed, reality  manifests  on
various levels, but  Srimad-Bhagavatam  enlightens  us  about  the  ultimate
reality, Sri Krsna, who encompasses and reconciles all other realities.
   In contrast to Srila Vyasadeva’s  presentation  in  the  Bhagavatam,  the
philosophies formulated by other ancient sages, such as Gautama and  Kanada,
incompletely describe reality. Gautama, in his system of  Nyaya  philosophy,
says that by understanding the empirical means and objects of knowledge  one
can free oneself from material  miseries.  And  Kanada,  in  his  system  of
Vaisesika philosophy, which was briefly alluded to at the end of this  Text,
recognizes  seven  categories  of  existence:  dravya   (substances),   guna
(qualities),  karma  (motions),   samanya   (general   categories),   visesa
(particularities), samavaya (inherence),  and  abhava  (nonexistence).  With
these seven categories the Vaisesikas try to explain  all  of  reality.  But
although the scientific  study  embodied  in  philosophies  like  Nyaya  and
Vaisesika may lead to realization of reality on  some  level,  this  is  far
different from realization of the Absolute Reality, which  Srimad-Bhagavatam
makes available. Srila Jiva Gosvami explains the nature of this  reality  in
the next Text.


   TATTVA SANDARBHA


   BY SRILA JIVA GOSWAMI


   [PART9]


===== TS.51 =====
NUMBER: 51
SOURCE LABEL: Text 51

TEXT 51
   atha kim-svarupam tad vastu-tattvam ity atraha
   vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam yaj jïanam advayam
   @VCONTINUE = iti. jïanam cid-eka-rupam. advayatvam  casya  svayam-siddha-
tadrsatadrsa-tattvantarabhavat  sva-sakty-eka-sahayatvat  paramasrayam   tam
vina tasam asiddhatvac ca. tattvam iti parama-purusarthata-dyotanaya parama-
sukha-rupatvam tasya bodhyate. ata eva tasya  nityatvam  ca  darsitam.  Sri-
sutah.
   “What is the nature of this Absolute Reality?”
Suta Gosvami answ ers [Bhag. 1.2.11]:
   “The knowers of that Absolute Reality
   call it nondual consciousness.”
   Here the word jïana refers to that entity  whose  nature  is  exclusively
pure
   consciousness. This pure spirit  is  called  nondual  for  the  following
reasons: (1) there is nothing else, either similar or  dissimilar,  that  is
self-existent; (2) it takes support only from its  own  potencies;  and  (3)
these  potencies  can  have  no  existence  without  it  as  their  absolute
foundation.
   The term tattva here implies the idea of the supreme goal of human  life.
Thus we
   understand that this tattva, or Absolute Reality, is  the  embodiment  of
the highest bliss and is therefore also eternal.
   The verse under discussion was spoken by Sri Suta Gosvami.


   COMMENTARY
   The Absolute Reality Is Nondual Consciousness
   In the last
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami stated that the Absolute Reality
   is to be known from Srimad-Bhagavatam. This naturally raises the
   question, “What is the essential nature of  this  Absolute  Reality?”  In
reply Jiva Gosvami quotes Srimad-Bhagavatam’s statement that the Absolute
   Reality is nondual (advayam), or in other words  one  without  a  second.
There cannot be more than one
   Absolute Reality, because if a second one were to be found the first  one
would immediately cease  to  be  absolute.  That  the  Absolute  Reality  is
nondual, however, does
   not mean that nothing else exists. Rather, the word  “nondual”  indicates
two further
   things (in addition to the meaning stated  above):  first,  the  Absolute
Reality is self-existent, meaning that it is grounded
   in itself and depends on no external support; second,  nothing  else  can
exist independent of this nondual reality’s support.
   In Vedic philosophy, an object is considered nondual if  it  is  free  of
three kinds of differences—those among objects  of  the  same  class,  those
among objects of different classes, and those  between  an  object  and  its
parts. A difference between objects of the same class  is  called  sajatiya-
bheda. Even though two chairs may look the  same,  function  the  same,  and
belong to the class called “chair,” they still differ as individual  chairs.
A change in one will not directly affect the  other.  A  difference  between
objects of different classes is called vijatiya-bheda. For example,  in  its
appearance and function a chair  is  different  from  a  table.  Finally,  a
difference between an object and its parts  is  called  sva-gata-bheda.  For
example, if all the parts of a  chair  are  scattered,  the  chair  will  no
longer exist. In this way the chair is not self-existent.
   These three kinds of differences give rise  to  the  duality  we  observe
throughout material nature. They do not  exist,  however,  on  the  absolute
plane; thus Suta Gosvami calls the  pure  consciousness  (Absolute  Reality)
jïanam advayam, nondual consciousness.
   Even when the Supreme Personality of Godhead expands into forms  such  as
Ramacandra  and  Balarama,  these  svamsa   (selfsame)   expansions   remain
nondifferent  from  the  Lord’s  original  self.  Still,  while  He  is  not
dependent on Them, They are dependent on Him. Since the Lord and His  svamsa
expansions belong to the same class, no  difference  of  the  sajatiya-bheda
type is found in Him.
   Material nature, being inert, belongs to a class of  existence  different
from that of the transcendental Personality of Godhead. This might lead  one
to conclude that there is vijatiya-bheda between Him  and  material  nature.
Nevertheless, since  material  nature’s  existence  is  not  independent  or
separate from Him, there  is  ultimately  no  difference  of  vijatiya-bheda
between Him and His material expansions.
   Finally, the Lord’s body and its  limbs  are  each  fully  conscious  and
potent and therefore nondifferent from Him Himself. For this  reason  it  is
said that in Lord Krsna there exists  no  difference  of  the  svagata-bheda
type.
   The finite living entities belong to the marginal potency of the  Supreme
Lord. Thus one may view them in two ways, both  as  belonging  to  the  same
class as the Lord because they are conscious like Him, and as  belonging  to
a different class because their size and potency is very  small.  From  both
viewpoints the jivas are fully dependent on the Supreme Lord, so that  there
exist none of the three types of differences  between  them  and  the  Lord.
Srila Jiva Gosvami concludes, therefore, that although the  Lord’s  energies
render Him service in various ways, they have  no  existence  separate  from
Him (tam vina tasam asiddhatvat).
   Just
   as a spider weaves a web with a special substance it  produces  and  then
makes the web its home, so  Sri  Krsna,  the  personified  nondual  Absolute
Reality, employs His own energies to manifest the spiritual realm, where  He
resides. These energies  are  part  of  His  internal  nature  and  have  no
independent existence.
   In the verse under discussion  (Bhag.  1.2.11),  the  word  jïanam  means
“consciousness.” Its significance here is that the nondual
   reality is consciousness and also conscious, just as the sun is light and
also luminous. Because the word jïanam refers to the Absolute Reality,  this
nondual  consciousness  must   have   perpetual   existence   (sat)   as   a
characteristic. And because the
   word tattvam indicates the supreme objective of  life,  it  follows  that
this nondual reality must also be characterized  by  bliss  (ananda),  since
all living beings seek pleasure,  whether  they  know  it  or  not.  Indeed,
direct perception, logical analysis, and scriptural  authority  all  confirm
that the pursuit of happiness is the ultimate motivation in all  activities.
This is the basic purpose underlying creative and destructive processes  and
all personal relationships. As the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad  (2.4.5)  states,
na va are patyuh kamaya patih priyo bhavaty atmanas tu  kamaya  patih  priyo
bhavati: “My dear, the husband is not loved for his own sake,  but  for  the
sake of the self.”
   Here the word “self” refers to either the jiva or the  Supreme  Lord.  In
our conditioned state, the self we perceive is our own self,  the  jiva.  We
become attached to someone or something because  we  derive  happiness  from
loving that person or thing. This feeling of happiness comes from our  sense
of possession—the notion that the object of  love  is  “ours”—not  from  the
person or the object itself. The truth of this principle  is  shown  by  the
common experience that our happiness naturally decreases when our  sense  of
possession diminishes.
   By contrast, in the liberated state we realize that our ultimate Self  is
the Supreme Lord. When we act solely on the basis of this  understanding  we
become the Lord’s pure devotees, and then we render  service  only  for  His
pleasure and desire nothing in  return.  Even  if  the  all-attractive  Lord
treats us roughly we are still happy, for we have abandoned  all  fears  and
cares in our loving relationship with Him. Lord Caitanya  demonstrated  this
standard in His Siksastaka, where He prayed:
   @vpl1 = aslisya va pada-ratam pinastu mam
   @vpl2 = adarsanan marma-hatam karotu va
   @vpl1 = yatha tatha va vidadhatu lampato
   @vpl2 = mat-prana-nathas tu sa eva naparah
“I know no one but Krsna as my Lord, and He  shall  remain  so  even  if  He
handles me roughly in His embrace or makes me broken-hearted  by  not  being
present before me. He is completely free to do anything and everything,  for
He is always my worshipful Lord, unconditionally.”
   In conditioned life we do not know that Krsna is the  supreme  object  of
love and the source of all bliss.  Rather,  we  mistake  ourselves  for  the
source of bliss. To enlighten us about Himself, Krsna instructs  us  in  the
Bhagavad-gita (10.8–9):
   aham sarvasya prabhavo mattah sarvam pravartate
   iti matva bhajante mam budha bhava-samanvitah


   mac-citta mad-gata-prana bodhayantah parasparam
   kathayantas ca mam nityam tusyanti ca ramanti ca
“I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds.  Everything  emanates
from Me. The wise who perfectly know this engage in  My  devotional  service
and worship Me with all their hearts.  The  thoughts  of  My  pure  devotees
dwell in Me, their lives are fully devoted to My service,  and  they  derive
great satisfaction and  bliss  from  always  enlightening  one  another  and
conversing about Me.”
   Thus there is an inherent
   relationship between jïana (knowledge), satya  (eternal  existence),  and
ananda (bliss).  This  relationship  is  clearly  indicated  in  such  sruti
statements as vijïanam anandam brahma:
    “Brahman is pure consciousness and bliss” (Brhad-aranayaka Up.  3.9.34).
Thus the nature of the nondual consciousness described  in  this  verse  has
been designated sac-cid-ananda, “permanent
   existence, knowledge, and bliss.”
   In this
   TEXT Jiva Gosvami presented his thesis, that jïana  is  eternal.  In  the
next
   TEXT he will explain the purva-paksa, that jïana is momentary.


===== TS.52 =====
NUMBER: 52
SOURCE LABEL: Text 52

TEXT 52.1
   nanu nila-pitady-akaram ksanikam eva  jïanam  drstam  tat  punar  advayam
nityam jïanam katham laksyate yan-nistham idam sastram ity atraha
   sarva-vedanta-saram yad brahmatmaikatva-laksanam
   vastv advitiyam tan-nistham kaivalyaika-prayojanam
   @VCONTINUE = iti. `satyam  jïanam  anantam  brahma'  iti  yasya  svarupam
uktam,  `yenasrutam  srutam  bhavati'  iti   `yad-vijïanena   sarva-vijïanam
pratijïatam' `sad eva  saumyedam  agra  asit'  ity-adina  nikhila-jagad-eka-
karanata, `tad aiksata  bahu  syam'  ity  anena  satya-sankalpata  ca  yasya
pratipadita, tena  brahmana  svarupa-saktibhyam  sarva-brhattamena  sardham,
anena jivenatmaneti tadiyoktav idanta-nirdesena tato bhinnatve  ’py  atmata-
nirdesena tad-atmamsa-visesatvena labdhasya  badarayana-samadhi-drsta-yukter
aty-abhinnata-rahitasya jivatmano yad ekatvam `tat tvam asi' ity-adau  jïata
tad-amsa-bhuta-cid-rupatvena  samanakarata,  tad  eva  laksanam   prathamato
jïane sadhakatamam yasya,  tatha-bhutam  yat  sarva-vedanta-saram  advitiyam
vastu, tan-nistham tad-eka-visayam idam Sri-bhagavatam  iti  praktana-padya-
sthenanusangah.
   One may question, But events of consciousness  are  seen  to  exist  only
briefly, taking the shape, say, of a blue object one  moment  and  a  yellow
object the
   next. How then can consciousness be called the nondual and
   eternal theme of this scripture [Srimad-Bhagavatam]?
   Suta Gosvami replies:
   “This Bhagavatam is the essence of all  Vedanta  philosophy  because  its
subject matter is the Absolute Truth, which,  while  nondifferent  from  the
spirit soul, is the ultimate reality, one without  a  second.  The  goal  of
this literature is exclusive devotional service  unto  that  Supreme  Truth”
[Bhag. 12.13.12].
   The sruti has defined the nature of this Absolute Truth  (Brahman):  “The
Supreme Brahman is infinite truth and  knowledge”  [Taittiriya  Up.  2.1.1].
That Brahman is the sole cause of the  entire  creation  is  shown  by  such
sruti statements as “By
   hearing about which [Brahman] everything is heard” [Chandogya Up. 6.1.3],
“By knowing which [Brahman] everything is known,” and “My boy, in
   the beginning there was only sat, the  eternal  reality”  [Chandogya  Up.
6.2.1]. That the Supreme Brahman achieves everything simply  by  His  desire
is shown by the statement “He glanced and  desired,  Let  Me  become  many’”
[Chandogya Up.
   6.2.3].
   In the statement “Along with this individual living entity I shall
   manifest name and form” [Chandogya Up. 6.3.2], the living  entity  (jiva)
is mentioned in connection with and as belonging to the  Supreme,  which  is
called  Brahman  because  it  is  greater  than  all  else  in  essence  and
potencies; here the pronoun idam (“this”)
   differentiates the jiva  from  Brahman,  but  the  word  atmana  (“self”)
indicates that the jiva is part and parcel of  Brahman.  According  to  what
was revealed in Srila Vyasadeva’s trance, the living entity is
   one with the Supreme  Brahman  in  the  sense  of  not  being  completely
different from Him. Such sruti statements as tat tvam asi (“You  are  that”;
[Chandogya Up. 6.8.7]) reveal that the oneness of the Supreme  Brahman  with
the jiva consists of their both being purely  spiritual  by  virtue  of  the
jiva’s status as a particle of the Supreme Brahman. Understanding this  idea
helps one acquire preliminary knowledge of the Supreme Brahman.
   The entity thus designated as the Supreme Brahman, who is the essence  of
all the Upanisads and is one without a second, is  the  focus  of  interest,
the exclusive subject matter, of this Srimad-Bhagavatam. Here we  understand
“this Srimad-Bhagavatam” to be implied  by  the  syntactic  connection  with
that same phrase in one of the preceding verses [12.13.9].


   TEXT 52.2
   yatha janma-prabhrti kascid grha-guhavaruddhah suryam vividisuh kathaïcid
gavaksa-patitam suryamsu-kanam darsayitva  kenacid  upadisyate  esa  sa  ity
etat-tad-amsa-jyotih-samanakarataya tan maha-jyotir-mandalam  anusandhiyatam
ity arthas tadvat. jivasya tatha tad-amsatvam  ca  tad-acintya-sakti-visesa-
siddhatvenaiva paramatma-sandarbhe sthapayisyamah.
   The following analogy helps clarify the above idea.
   Suppose a person has been kept in a dark room from birth
   and has never seen the sun. When he  wants  to  know  what  the  sun  is,
someone
   points to a ray of sunlight passing through a window  grating  and  says,
“That is the sun. Try to understand that the
   sun is a great orb of light, of the same substance as this ray,
   which is a portion of it.” In the Paramatma-sandarbha we  will  establish
that the jiva is similarly a fractional  portion  of  the  Supreme  Brahman,
manifested by one of His inconceivable potencies.


   TEXT 52.3
    tad-etaj-jivadi-laksanamsa-visistatayaivopanisadas tasya  samsatvam  api
kvacid upadisanti.  niramsatvopadesika  srutis  tu  kevala-tan-nistha.  atra
kaivalyaika-prayojanam iti  caturtha-padas  ca  kaivalya-padasya  suddhatva-
matra-vacanatvena suddhatvasya ca  suddha-bhaktitvena  paryavasanena  priti-
sandarbhe vyakhyasyate. Sri-sutah.
   Thus when the Upanisads say that the Supreme Brahman has
   parts, they mean that one of His characteristics is to  be  endowed  with
the part-and-parcel living beings and other energies. Conversely,  when  the
srutis speak of Him as having no parts, they are focusing on  His  exclusive
essence.
   In  the  fourth  line  [of  Bhagavatam  12.13.12],  namely   kaivalyaika-
prayojanam, the word kaivalya (“oneness”) simply means “purity.”  Later,  in
the Priti-sandarbha, we will demonstrate that  this  purity  is  none  other
than pure devotional service.
   The verse under discussion  [Bhag.  12.13.12]  was  spoken  by  Sri  Suta
Gosvami.


   COMMENTARY
   The Meaning of Monistic Statements
   In the last
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami established that the Absolute Truth
   is eternal, nondual consciousness. One sect of Buddhists, the
   Ksanika-vijïana-vadis, raise  an  objection  to  this  conclusion.  Their
doctrine states that there is only one reality, consciousness, which is
   changing at every  moment,  and  that  there  is  no  difference  between
knowledge and the object of knowledge. Just as in our dreams the  things  we
see do not exist outside our consciousness,  so  also  in  our  waking  life
distinctions between knowledge and the object of  knowledge  are  not  real.
When we see a blue object our consciousness  is  blue.  If  we  next  see  a
yellow object, the blue consciousness is destroyed and our consciousness
   changes to yellow. How, then, can
   consciousness  be  called  eternal?  This  is  their  objection  to  Jiva
Gosvami’s conclusion that the Absolute Truth is eternal.
   The Vijïana-vadis reason that an eternal object cannot be the
   cause of anything since in general a cause transforms into its
   effect. For example, since milk transforms  into  yogurt,  it  cannot  be
eternal.
   Similarly, the nondual consciousness, being the cause of everything, must
undergo transformation and therefore cannot be eternal. Further,  they  say,
everything is changing at every moment,
   although we may not notice the moment-by-moment change, just as we do not
notice the moment-by-moment growth of plants or our bodies.
   To the Vijïana-vadis’ argument Srila Jiva  Gosvami  replies  not  with  a
logical refutation but by quoting
   Srimad-Bhagavatam, the supreme pramana.
   The Bhagavatam verse given here  (12.13.12)  explains  that  the  nondual
reality
   is characterized by oneness of the Supreme with  the  individual  selves.
Thus the oneness of reality is  not  the  Buddhists’  oneness  of  momentary
consciousness and its objects. This reality is advaya-jïana, the essence  of
all the Upanisads and
   the subject matter of Srimad-Bhagavatam; it is not
   momentary but eternal, conscious, and blissful by nature; it is the
   cause of everything in this  universe;  and  it  can  achieve  everything
simply by its will. All this implies that the advaya-jïana is  endowed  with
multifarious
   potencies. It is called Brahman because it is the greatest and because it
can
   make others great: brhattvad brmhanatvac ca yad brahma paramam
   viduh (Visnu Pur. 3.3.21). The
   various sruti statements cited in this
   TEXT describe all these characteristics of  Brahman.  So  the  theory  of
consciousness of the
   Ksanika-vijïana-vadis does not agree with either sruti or
   Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   The Vijïana-vadis’ theory of reality is based on  their  assumption  that
there is no absolute, pure consciousness.  The  Vijïana-vadis  do  not  know
that  the  absolute  reality   is   a   person   possessing   acintya-sakti,
inconceivable potencies, through which He causes everything while  remaining
unaffected. As the Isopanisad declares in its opening verse,
   om purnam adah purnam idam purnat purnam udacyate
   purnasya purnam adaya purnam evavasisyate
“The Personality of Godhead is perfect  and  complete,  and  because  He  is
completely perfect, all emanations from Him, such as this phenomenal  world,
are perfectly equipped as complete  wholes.  Whatever  is  produced  of  the
Complete Whole is also complete  in  itself.  Because  He  is  the  Complete
Whole, even though so many complete units emanate from Him, He  remains  the
complete balance.”
   The Vijïana-vadis’ view is based on a  material  conception  of  changing
consciousness. Their understanding does not apply  to  the  absolute  realm.
While in our ordinary experience material energy is in a constant  state  of
flux, the Lord and His internal energies are not under the  same  system  of
natural laws that govern material nature. The example of  the  spider  cited
in the previous
   TEXT also applies here: from within itself the spider produces a  special
substance and then weaves its web with it, and later it draws the  substance
back  within  itself,  all  without  undergoing   any   transformation.   To
understand the Absolute Truth, we must first  shed  all  our  misconceptions
based on material conditioning and  simply  hear  from  authentic  spiritual
authorities  in  disciplic  succession.  The  Vedic   literature   therefore
recommends that even if a person is highly qualified  by  good  birth,  good
education, and so forth, he still should present  himself  as  ignorant  and
foolish at the feet of a  bona  fide  spiritual  master,  inquire  from  him
submissively, and render service to him. This is  the  correct  process  for
cleansing one’s heart and mind of  material  contamination,  and  a  sincere
candidate for spiritual life who follows this  process  can  gradually  gain
full realization of the Absolute Truth. The Vijïana-vadis,  being  followers
of Lord Buddha, reject the Vedas, but as seen  from  the  above  discussion,
they end up with a hopelessly muddled  explanation  of  reality  beyond  our
sensual inspection. They say consciousness is momentary. If this were  true,
then consciousness could not be the cause of anything, because according  to
the Nyaya school of logic a cause has to exist for at least two moments.  It
must exist as the cause for the first moment and then transform  or  produce
the result in the next moment. And if our consciousness  were  existing  for
only one moment at a time, we  could  not  remember  our  past  experiences,
since there would be  no  continuity  from  one  moment’s  consciousness  to
another moment’s consciousness. A person who has experienced  something  can
recall it later on, but if  consciousness  were  momentary  there  would  be
nothing to recall in the next  moment’s  consciousness.  This  is  certainly
contrary to everyone’s experience.
   Nor can the Vijïana-vadis’ idea of the external world withstand the  test
of logic. They say that the external world is a manifestation  of  momentary
consciousness. Here a  question  may  be  asked:  Are  things  perceived  as
external one with momentary consciousness  or  different  from  it?  If  the
Vijïana-vadis claim that the external  objects  are  separately  real,  then
they are agreeing with our Vaisnava opinion and are contradicting their  own
statement that the apparently external objects are only a  manifestation  of
internal consciousness. On the other hand, if they  say  that  the  external
objects are one with internal consciousness, in practice there would  be  no
way to distinguish between the momentary,  internal  consciousness  and  the
objects it perceives. Also, there would be no  standard  to  separate,  say,
blue consciousness from  yellow  consciousness,  and  thus  our  perceptions
would be rife with confusion.
   As is known from both reason and direct experience, consciousness  always
has a subject (one who is conscious) and an object (what  one  is  conscious
of). If momentary consciousness alone were real,  where  would  its  subject
and object be? To this the vijïana-vadis offer no  satisfactory  answer.  If
neither  external  objects  nor  such  internal  objects  as  happiness  and
distress  are  different  from  the  perceiver,  then  who  is   doing   the
perceiving?  Everyone’s  common  experience  is  that  the  perceiver,   the
perceived, and the perception are distinct.
   In this
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami again clarifies that the oneness of the jiva  and
Brahman spoken of in sruti should not be understood as absolute
   oneness.  After  all,   sruti   contains   such   statements   as   anena
jivenatmananupravisya nama-rupe vyakaravani: “Along with this jiva I shall
   enter as Paramatma and create name and form” (Chandogya Up. 6.3.2).  Here
the pronoun anena (“this”), referring to the jiva, implies that the jiva  is

   different from “I,” the speaker (God). Nonetheless, elsewhere the jiva is
described
   as part and parcel of Brahman, a conclusion confirmed  by  Srila  Vyasa’s
trance. The reconciliation of this apparent contradiction  is  that,  as  we
have discussed before, the jiva and Brahman are one in the  sense  of  their
sharing the common characteristic of  consciousness  but  are  different  in
their individual identities and potencies. When someone
   says that Texans and New Yorkers are one, we understand him to mean  they
are from the same  country,  the  United  States,  not  that  they  have  no
separate identities.
   The jivas are parts of Brahman, the whole. This is the oneness
   of Brahman with  its  parts,  its  energies,  which  is  the  fundamental
teaching
   of the Upanisads and also of Srimad-Bhagavatam. The
   idea is that in general the part is dependent on the whole and  helps  it
function. When separated from the whole, the part becomes useless,  just  as
a finger lopped off a hand becomes useless. In the
   same way, the relation between the jivas and the  Supreme  Lord,  who  is
known as
   Brahman in the Upanisads, is that of the servants  and  the  served.  The
jivas have no independent existence. All their problems begin when t
   hey start considering themselves independent of the Supreme Lord.
   Correctly understanding the oneness between Brahman
   and the jivas is a fundamental step in understanding the
   nature of Brahman. Every jiva directly experiences his own consciousness,
and the Upanisads, on the basis of the oneness of  Brahman  and  the  jivas,
instruct the jivas to extrapolate from that  experience  some  idea  of  the
nature of Brahman. To illustrate this process, Srila Jiva Gosvami gives  the
analogy of a
   man born and bred in a cavelike room who  has  never  seen  the  sun.  To
educate this man about the sun, someone may point to a
   ray of sunlight shining into his dark room through  a  tiny  opening  and
tell him, “This single ray of light is from  the  sun,  an  enormous  sphere
that emanates countless similar rays.” From this  information  the  man  can
get some idea of what the sun is like. The Upanisads use  this  same  method
to instruct the jivas about Brahman’s status as pure consciousness.  Indeed,
the jivas are
   like atomic rays emanating from the sunlike Brahman. The sun’s rays are
   not completely different from the sun, for they originate from the
   sun, nor are they absolutely one with the sun, since  they  can  be  seen
apart from  the  sun  and  they  lack  the  complete  potency  of  the  sun.
Similarly, the jivas are neither completely one with Brahman nor  completely
different from Brahman. In his Sarva-samvadini,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  calls
this relationship between the jiva and
   Brahman  acintya-bhedabheda,  “inconceivable,  simultaneous  oneness  and
difference.” Owing to this relationship, Brahman  is  described  as  advaya-
jïana, or nondual consciousness, which is the subject of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   Thus the word Brahman—as the Upanisads  and  also  Srimad-Bhagavatam  use
it—should  not  be  misunderstood  to  mean   impersonal   Brahman   without
qualities. The Mayavadis insist on this wrong understanding,  but  according
to logic such an impersonal Brahman cannot  exist,  because  if  it  did  it
would possess the attribute of existence, which implies  potency,  which  in
turn implies duality—Brahman plus attributes. But  Mayavadis  abhor  duality
in the absolute realm.  Therefore  in  no  Vedic  scripture  does  the  word
Brahman mean impersonal Brahman in the sense that the Mayavadis intend.
   The true conception of Brahman is  stated  by  Suta  Gosvami  in  Srimad-
Bhagavatam (1.2.11): brahmeti paramatmeti bhagavan iti
   sabdyate. “This nondual consciousness is called Brahman, Paramatma,
   and Bhagavan” Here Suta Gosvami does not say that the Absolute  Truth  is
also   called   jiva.   He   includes   only   the   above-mentioned   three
designations—three names of the same nondual
   consciousness, which Srimad-Bhagavatam identifies as Krsna,  the  Supreme
Personality of Godhead.  The  Absolute  Truth  appears  differently  to  the
practitioners of various spiritual processes, but the Absolute Truth  itself
does not change.
   This is the significance of the word sabdyate (“is designated”) here. The
Brahman described in the Vedic scriptures is Bhagavan, the  Supreme  Person,
Krsna.
   In the sruti we find two types of statements concerning the  relationship
between the jivas and Brahman: those  statements  designating  the  jiva  as
part of Brahman and those indicating his
   oneness with  Brahman.  The  real  distinction  between  these  kinds  of
statements  is  only  one  of  emphasis  on  either  difference  (bheda)  or
nondifference (abheda). Statements in the  Vedic  scripture  such  as  nityo
nityanam cetanas  cetananam  (“That  one  eternal  conscious  being  is  the
support for the many eternal conscious beings”; Katha Up. 2.2.13) belong  to
the bheda class. Statements such as sarvam khalv idam brahma  (“Indeed,  all
this is Brahman”) belong to the abheda class.
   The word kaivalya in Bhagavatam 12.13.12 properly
   means “pure devotion.” Although impersonalists commonly use this term  to
mean
   final emancipation, or merging into Brahman, Brahman  is  not  ultimately
impersonal, as the Mayavadis claim. Their usage  of  kaivalya  is  therefore
absurd. Kaivalya means liberation, but the real mark of liberation  is  pure
devotional service, not  merging  into  Brahman.  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  will
explain this more fully in the Priti-sandarbha.
   To summarize, each statement  in  the  Vedic  scriptures  describing  the
oneness of Brahman and the  jivas  serves  one  or  more  of  the  following
purposes:
   1. To distinguish both  Brahman  and  the  jivas  from  inert  matter  by
pointing to consciousness as their common quality.
   2. To show that the jivas are fractional parts of the Supersoul.
   3. To teach that the jivas are dependent on the Supersoul.
   4. To indicate that by becoming an unalloyed devotee of the Lord  a  jiva
can become powerful like the Supreme Lord.
   5. To show that living in the material world is not the natural,  healthy
condition of the jiva.
   6. To show that the jiva, whether in conditioned life or  in  liberation,
is dependent on the Lord.
   7. To establish that Brahman is the only self-existent reality.
   One should not think that any statement in the Vedic scriptures about the
oneness of Brahman and the jivas asserts their absolute oneness.
   To know the Supersoul, one  must  first  understand  the  nature  of  the
individual
   self, the jiva. Thus in the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami begins  explaining  the  characteristics  of  the
self.


===== TS.53 =====
NUMBER: 53
SOURCE LABEL: Text 53

TEXT 53.1
   tatra yadi tvam-padarthasya jivatmano jïanatvam nityatvam  ca  prathamato
vicara-gocarah syat tadaiva tat-padarthasya tadrsatvam  su-bodham  syad  iti
tad  bodhayitum  `anyarthas  ca  paramarsah'  iti  nyayena  jivatmanas  tad-
rupatvam aha.
   @VL1 = natma jajana na marisyati naidhate ’sau
   @VL2 = na ksiyate savana-vid vyabhicarinam hi
   @VL1 = sarvatra sasvad anapayy upalabdhi-matram
   @VL2PLUS = prano yathendriya-balena vikalpitam sat
   The jiva is designated tvam (“you”) in the statement tat tvam  asi  (“You
are that.”). If one first understands  that  this  “you”  is  conscious  and
eternal, then one can easily understand how the Supreme Brahman (tat) has  a
similar nature. To make just this point, in accordance  with  the  reasoning
of Vedanta-sutra [1.3.20]—“One contemplates the jiva in order  to  know  the
other, the Supreme”—sage Pippalayana describes the jiva as having  the  same
nature as tat when he says to King Nimi [Bhagavatam 11.3.38]:
   “The soul was never born and will never die, nor does it grow  or  decay.
It is actually the knower of  the  youth,  middle  age,  and  death  of  the
material body. It can thus be understood to be pure consciousness,  existing
everywhere at all times and never being destroyed.  Just  as  the  life  air
within the body, although one, becomes as many in contact with  the  various
material  senses,  so  the  soul  appears   to   assume   various   material
designations in contact with its material bodies.”


   TEXT 53.2
   atma suddho jivo na jajana na  jato  janmabhavad  eva  tad-anantarastita-
laksano  vikaro  ’pi  nasti.  naidhate  na   vardhate   vrddhy-abhavad   eva
viparinamo ’pi nirastah. hi yasmat. vyabhicarinam agamapayinam  bala-yuvadi-
dehanam deva-manusyady-akara-dehanam va. savana-vit tat-tat-kala-drasta.  na
hy avastha-vatam drasta tad-avastho bhavatity arthah.  niravasthah  ko  ’sav
atma. ata aha upalabdhi-matram jïanaika-rupam. katham-bhutam. sarvatra  dehe
sasvat sarvada anuvartamanam iti.
   Here atma means “the pure self,” and na jajana means “he was never born.”
Since
   he has no birth, the self is also  free  from  the  next  transformation,
sustained existence. Naidhate
   means “he does not increase”; since he does not  increase,  he  does  not
undergo
   transformation. The word hi means “because,” the idea of logical  reason.
Vyabhicarinam means “of all impermanent
   things,”  namely  the  living  entity’s  various  bodies  in   childhood,
adolescence, and so on, or else the living entity’s bodies  in  the  various
species of life—demigods,
   humans, and others. The self is the savana-vit, the witness  of  each  of
these stages of life. Certainly this witness is not subject to  the  varying
conditions of what he merely observes. In answer to  the  question  “Who  is
this unchanging self?” Pippalayana says, “He is pure consciousness,  nothing
but awareness.” How does he  exist?  “He  is  eternally  present  everywhere
throughout the body.”


   TEXT 53.3
   nanu   nila-jïanam   nastam   pita-jïanam   jatam   iti    pratiter    na
jïanasyanapayitvam. tatraha indriya-baleneti. sad eva jïanam  ekam  indriya-
balena vividham kalpitam. nilady-akara vrttaya eva jayante  nasyanti  ca  na
jïanam  iti  bhavah.  ayam  agamapayi-tad-avadhi-bhedena  prathamas  tarkah.
drastr-drsya-bhedena    dvitiyo    ’pi    tarko     jïeyah.     vyabhicarisv
avasthitasyavyabhicare drstantah prano yatheti.
   “But how can we consider consciousness ever-present, since we
   experience that after our consciousness of something blue disappears  our
consciousness of something yellow appears?”  Pippalayana  answers,  indriya-
balena  (“by  the  power  of  the   senses”),   indicating   that   although
consciousness is always present and is one, the power of the  senses  causes
it to appear variegated. In other words, it is not
   consciousness itself that appears and disappears; rather, what appear and
disappear are the various mental  states  in  the  form  of  perceptions  of
something blue and so on.
   Thus the first argument [presented to help identify the Absolute Reality]
is based on the difference between
   the things that appear and disappear and that which  is  not  subject  to
such changes. The second argument is based on the difference
   between the observer and the objects he observes. The example of the life

   air shows how something unchanging can exist in the  midst  of  ephemeral
objects.


   COMMENTARY
   Characteristics of the Soul
   As mentioned above, the  Vedic  statements  that  describe  nondifference
between the jiva and Brahman do so in reference to the
   common attributes of both. One popular example of such a statement is tat
tvam asi, “You are that.” Here the word tat and tvam signify Brahman
   the jiva, respectively, who both possess the attribute of  consciousness.
The idea behind this statement is  that  one  who  clearly  understands  the
jiva’s spiritual nature can easily grasp
   the nature of Brahman.
   The same idea lies behind the analogy Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  gave  in  the
previous Text, in which a man in a  cave  learns  about  the  sun  by  being
instructed about a sun-ray.
   This  technique  has  also  been  used  in  the  Vedanta-sutra  (1.3.20):
anyarthas ca paramarsah. “One  reflects  [on  the  jiva]  for  the  sake  of
understanding the other [Paramatma].” Srila Baladeva Vidyabhusana
   comments: “This sutra refers to the dahara-vidya portion of the Chandogya
Upanisad (8.1), which describes meditation on the  Supersoul  in  the  small
space (dahara)
   within the heart. The body of the worshiper is  considered  the  city  of
Brahman, in which lies  the  Supersoul,  the  worshipable  Lord  within  the
dahara. The worshiper is supposed to meditate on the
   eightfold qualities belonging to the Supersoul. These eight qualities are
listed in the Chandogya Upanisad (8.7.1): `The Supersoul is free  from  sin,
old age, death, sorrow, hunger, and thirst. He  has  unfailing  desires  and
unfailing determination.’ But further along (Chandogya Up.
   8.12.13), mention is made of a blissful
   one who rises out of the body, attains to the light, and becomes
   situated in his own real nature. He is called the purusottama.” This
   purusottama, according to Baladeva Vidyabhusana,  is  the  jiva  who  has
attained
   perfection by acquiring transcendental knowledge of the Supreme Lord.
   This raises an obvious doubt: Why in the midst of this
   description of the dahara, dealing with meditation on the  Supersoul,  is
the jiva mentioned? To answer this doubt, the above sutra (V.s.  1.3.20)  is
quoted. The reference to the jiva in  the  dahara-vidya  is  not  simply  to
convey knowledge about the jiva but to lead to
   knowledge about the Supersoul, and by  knowing  the  Supersoul  the  jiva
attains his real
   nature. In  Srimad-Bhagavatam  11.3.38,  Pippalayana  Yogendra  similarly
instructs King Nimi about the jiva to
   educate him about the nature of the Lord.
   The purpose of the above-mentioned verse  spoken  by  Pippalayana  is  to
distinguish the self from the body.
   The body undergoes six types of changes. These are listed in the  Nirukta
(1.1.2): jayate ’sti vardhate viparinamate ’paksiyate nasyati ca. “The  body

   takes birth, exists for some time, grows,  undergoes  changes,  dwindles,
and finally dies.”  The  soul,  however,  does  not  undergo  any  of  these
changes, as Lord Krsna confirms in Chapter Two of the Bhagavad-gita.
   The argument for the soul not undergoing these  changes  is  that  he  is
their continuous
   observer. A man sitting in a moving
   airplane and unable to look out the window cannot understand how fast  it
is going, but an observer on the ground can  easily  understand.  Similarly,
we do not feel the earth rotating because we  are  riding  on  it,  but  the
astronauts can easily see this from their space vehicles.
   The objection of the  Ksanika-vijïana-vadis  discussed  in  the  previous
Text—namely, that consciousness is only momentary—is
   repeated here (in
   TEXT 53.3) and answered differently. The momentary consciousness of
   which they speak actually consists of changes in one’s
   mental state. It is produced by the senses interacting with the  external
world. Consciousness itself is constant. The Vedanta explains  that  when  a
person looks at
   an object there arises a particular mental state, called a  vrtti,  which
the soul perceives. The mental state itself is not the perceiver. But the
   Buddhists,  who  are  totally  ignorant  about  the  soul,  mistake  this
temporary, ever-changing vrtti for the real consciousness.
   This point is further clarified with the analogy of the life air. Air  is
one, but air within the body has various names, such as prana, apana, and
   samana, according to the function it performs. Similarly, the
   soul is one, but on account of the senses,  the  consciousness  the  soul
manifests while in the body
   appears many-branched and ever-changing. This phenomenon  is  similar  to
the way in which sweetened milk gives rise to different mental  states  when
perceived with different senses: to the eyes it  is  white,  to  the  tongue
sweet, and so on.
   So it is not the self but only the mental
   state  affected  by  varieties  of  sense  perception  that  appears  and
disappears, or
   undergoes changes. The living entity is a fractional part of the  Supreme
Lord, and since the Lord is conscious and eternal  the  living  entity  must
share these qualities, just as a tiny gold nugget shares  the  qualities  of
the mother lode. And the purpose of explaining  the  conscious  and  eternal
quality of the soul with  logic  and  personal  experience  is  to  help  us
develop an understanding of the Supersoul.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami derives two arguments from the  words  of  Pippalayana
(Bhag. 11.3.38), both of which  serve  to  distinguish  the  soul  from  the
material body. The first argument is based on the changes that occur in  the
material body. We see these  changes  as  time  progresses,  but  with  some
reflection we can understand that we ourselves have not changed but are  the
same person. Since  the  attributes  of  changelessness  and  transformation
cannot be attributed to  the  same  object,  the  unchanging  soul  must  be
distinct from the changing body.
   Sri Jiva’s second argument  is  based  on  the  distinction  between  the
perceiver and the perceived. The body  and  mind  cannot  be  the  observer,
because they are objects of perception. Thus the perceiver, the  soul,  must
be different from them.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami presents further logic to  help  distinguish  the
self from the body.


===== TS.54 =====
NUMBER: 54
SOURCE LABEL: Text 54

TEXT 54.1
   drstantam vivrnvann indriyadi-layena nirvikaratmopalabdhim darsayati
   @VL1 = andesu pesisu tarusv aviniscitesu
   @VL2 = prano hi jivam upadhavati tatra tatra
   @VL1 = sanne yad indriya-gane ’hami ca prasupte
   @VL2 = kuta-stha asayam rte tad-anusmrtir nah
   j
   @VCONTINUE = andesu anda-jesu. pesisu  jarayu-jesu.  tarusu  udbhij-jesu.
aviniscitesu sveda-jesu. upadhavati anuvartate.
   Expanding further on this example, Pippalayana Rsi uses  the  analogy  of
the senses’ dissolution to demonstrate the soul’s changelessness:
   “The spirit soul is born in many different species  of  life  within  the
material world. Some species  are  born  from  eggs,  others  from  embryos,
others from the seeds of plants and trees,  and  others  from  perspiration.
But in all species of life the prana, or vital air, remains  unchanging  and
follows the spirit soul from one body  to  another.  Similarly,  the  spirit
soul is eternally the same despite its material condition of life.  We  have
practical experience of this. When we are absorbed  in  deep  sleep  without
dreaming, the material senses become inactive, and even the mind  and  false
ego are merged into a dormant condition. But although the senses, mind,  and
false ego are inactive, one remembers upon waking that  he,  the  soul,  was
peacefully sleeping” [Bhag. 11.3.39].
   Here andesu means “among those born from eggs,” pesisu means “among those
born from wombs,” tarusu means “among those born from plants,”  aviniscitesu
means “among those born from perspiration or  heat,”  and  upadhavati  means
“follows.”


   TEXT 54.2
   evam drstante nirvikaratvam pradarsya darstantike ’pi darsayati.  katham.
tadaivatma sa-vikara iva pratiyate yada jagare indriya-gano yada  ca  svapne
tat-samskara-van ahankarah. yada tu prasuptam tada tasmin prasupta  indriya-
gane sanne lina ahami ahankare  ca  sanne  line  kuta-stho  nirvikara  atma.
kutah. asayam rte linga-sariram upadhim vina  vikara-hetor  upadher  abhavad
ity arthah.
   Having  thus  shown  the  changeless  quality  of  the  life  air,   sage
Pippalayana now compares the soul to it and in this  way  demonstrates  that
the soul is also changeless. How is this? The soul appears  to  be  changing
either when he
   is in contact with his senses during waking consciousness or when  he  is
connected only with his ego while sleeping and dreaming, at which  time  his
ego is filled with impressions from the waking state. But when the  soul  is
in  deep  sleep,  the  senses  and  ego  become  temporarily  submerged   or
dissolved, and only the changeless, essential soul
   remains. How does he remain? Asayam rte: without the “containing vessel,”
the limitation of the
   subtle body. That is to say, he is free  from  the  upadhis  that  impose
changes upon him.


   TEXT 54.3
   nanv ahankara-paryantasya sarvasya laye sunyam evavasisyate kva tada kuta-
stha atma. ata  aha  tad-anusmrtir  nas  tasyakhandatmanah  susupti-saksinah
smrtir no 'smakam  jagrad-drastènam  jayate  `etavantam  kalam  sukham  aham
asvapam na kiïcid avedisam' iti. ato ’nanubhutasya  tasyasmaranad  asty  eva
susuptau tadrg-atmanubhavo visaya-sambandhabhavac ca na spasta iti bhavah.
   But, one may object, when everything up  to  and  including  the  ego  is
dissolved, only a void should remain. Why then is it said that even at  this
time the changeless soul  is  present?  Pippalayana  answers,  tad-anusmrtir
nah: “We remember it.” When we, the perceivers of waking life, wake up  from
deep sleep, we each
   remember our self as the  constantly  existing  soul  who  witnessed  the
condition of deep sleep. We say, “I slept
   happily for so long and was not aware of anything.” Since a person cannot
remember what he has not experienced, the soul must perceive the  experience
of deep sleep, though this experience is indistinct because he  is  cut  off
from the objects of external sensation.


   TEXT 54.4
   atah sva-prakasa-matra-vastunah suryadeh prakasa-vad upalabdhi-matrasyapy
atmana uplabdhih svasraye ’sty evety ayatam. tatha ca srutih  `yad  vai  tan
na pasyati pasyan vai drastavyan na pasyati na hi drastur drster  viparilopo
vidyate'  iti.   ayam   saksi-saksya-vibhagena   trtiyas   tarkah.   duhkhi-
premaspadatva-vibhagena caturtho ’pi tarko ’vagantavyah.
   We can therefore conclude that the soul, who is pure awareness,  is  also
aware of itself, just as an entity such as the sun, which  is  in  substance
pure light, also reveals  itself  by  that  light.  We  find  the  following
confirmation in sruti: “It is true that  he  [the  soul]  is  not  seeing—or
rather that although seeing, he does not  see  externally  visible  objects.
But it is not
   possible to remove the seer’s sight altogether” [Brhad-aranyaka Up.
   4.3.23].
   This [idea that the soul is aware even during deep sleep] constitutes the
third argument [presented to help us identify the Absolute Reality];  it  is
based on the distinction between the
   witness and the objects witnessed. We can also understand the
   fourth argument, which is based on the distinction  between  the  unhappy
sufferer and the focus of ecstatic love.


   COMMENTARY
   The Soul Is Distinct from the Body
   In the previous
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami cited the analogy of the life air given in Srimad-
Bhagavatam 11.3.38 to
   show the changeless nature  of  the  soul.  The  following  verse  (Bhag.
11.3.39) develops this analogy  further.  There  Sage  Pippalayana  explains
that the life air continuously follows the soul into various
   species of life, which fall into four categories based on
   their source of birth. The life air enters the various bodies  and  seems
to undergo transformations, but in fact it remains
   unchanged. For example, the soul’s life air may occupy the body of an ant
in one life and that of an elephant in a different life, yet all  the  while
the life air remains unchanged.  Similarly,  the  soul  appears  to  undergo
changes in association with the many states and  shapes  of  his  successive
bodies, but in fact he remains unchanged.
   The soul experiences three states of consciousness while in the body: the
waking state, the dreaming state, and the state of  deep,  dreamless  sleep.
During the waking state a jiva is
   conscious of his gross body, gross senses, and mind, and his
   consciousness seems divided and channeled by the mind and senses. In  the
dreaming
   state the gross senses become inactive, or, to be more precise, the  mind
loses
   contact with them, and thus the jiva is  also  not  aware  of  the  gross
senses or
   the gross body. Through dreams the  jiva  in  this  state  perceives  the
various impressions
   created in the subconscious mind during the waking state, and because  of
the jiva’s attachment to  these  impressions,  his  consciousness  seems  to
undergo
   transformation. In the state of deep,  dreamless  sleep  the  soul  loses
contact even with the mind, and thus he  is  not  conscious  of  either  his
gross or subtle body.
   According to sruti, in the state of dreamless sleep the mind enters  into
the
   puritat nerve in the heart: atha yada susupto bhavati yada na kasyacana
   veda hita nama nadyo dva-saptatih sahsrani hrdayat
   puritatam abhipratisthante, tabhih  pratyavasrpya  puritati  sete.  “When
[the soul] is fast asleep, he does not
   know anything. At that time the mind removes itself from the  seventy-two
thousand nerves (hita)
   spreading out from the heart and enters into
   the nerve called puritat, where it rests.” (Brhad-aranyaka Up. 2.1.19).
   Feelings of happiness and distress are states of the mind  and  therefore
part of the “field” of the subtle body. This is described  in  Bhagavad-gita
(13.7): “Desire, hatred, happiness, distress,
   the aggregate [the physical body], the life  symptoms,  and  convictions—
these are
   considered,  in  summary,  to  be  the  field  of  activities   and   its
interactions.” As mentioned above, in deep  sleep  the  soul  loses  contact
with
   the mind and feels no material  happiness  or  distress,  no  desires  or
hatred.
   He tastes only the bliss of the self. But this does not mean the
   soul becomes liberated in deep sleep. He is still bound by his subtle
   desires, which return him to the dreaming and waking states.
   From the Buddhists comes an objection that the soul cannot exist in  deep
sleep. When there is no experience of the senses or the mind,
   why not assume that only the “void” remains during deep sleep? The answer
is “Because we recollect the experience of deep sleep.”  After  waking  from
deep sleep a person may declare, “I have slept happily and wasn’t  aware  of
anything.”  Since  someone  cannot  recollect   something   without   having
experiencing it, the person who perceived himself  in  deep  sleep  and  the
person who remembers this experience must be identical. Thus  the  happiness
of deep sleep was experienced by the same
   person who recalls it upon awakening, but his recollection is
   hazy because during deep sleep his link with  the  mind  and  senses  was
broken.
   The implication here is that although there  is  no  false  ego  manifest
during deep sleep, the soul’s real ego remains, for this  is  his  true  and
inseparable identity. So there is no possibility  of  voidness  during  deep
sleep, as the Buddhists claim, nor is it  possible  that  the  soul  becomes
mere consciousness without individuality, as the Mayavadis claim.
   This argument establishes that the soul’s quality of
   cognition is an essential aspect of its nature. It is thus not true  that
the soul acquires cognition only  when  conditioned,  nor  that  he  remains
solely as pure consciousness in the unconditioned state. As
   the sun illuminates both itself and other things as well,  the  soul  can
always know both himself and other things. The soul does not need help  from
the gross external senses to know itself, just as one does not need a lamp
   to see the sun. This quality of cognition stays with the soul  throughout
all his states of existence, even when he inhabits lower species, just as  a
light bulb continues to emit light even when enveloped by  a  nearly  opaque
covering. The covering simply limits and distorts the light’s diffusion.  Of
course, it is the  Supreme  Lord  who  grants  the  soul  his  self-luminous
nature, and so from the above we should not wrongly conclude that  the  jiva
is a completely independent entity.
   The passage from the Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad quoted in this
   TEXT states, “He [the soul]  certainly  does  not  see.”  This  statement
refers to the soul in deep sleep. At that time the soul  does  not  perceive
anything because he is detached from the mind  and  senses;  this  does  not
mean, however, that his power  of  perception  is  lost.  Thus  the  passage
further  says,  “Although  seeing,  he  does  not  see  externally   visible
objects.”
   In the previous
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami showed that the soul is distinct from
   the body. He substantiated this conclusion by citing the analogy  of  the
life
   air. Here he has further shown that the soul is distinct  both  from  the
body and from the Supersoul. He presented four arguments. We have  discussed
the first two in our
   COMMENTARY  on
   TEXT 53. The third argument  is  based  on  the  difference  between  the
witness and the
   witnessed. During deep sleep, when the soul ceases to identify  with  the
mind and senses, he witnesses his  own  self,  and  he  can  recollect  this
experience upon  awakening.  This  phenomenon  demonstrates  the  changeless
nature of the soul by showing that it is  distinct  from  the  ever-changing
body and senses.
   The fourth argument is based on the fact that it is not the Supersoul but
the jiva who suffers material tribulations, although both dwell in the  same
body. The Supersoul is the witness of both
   the soul and the activities of the  soul’s  material  body.  As  we  have
pointed out, in the state of dreamless sleep the  soul  becomes  temporarily
dissociated from his subtle and gross body, but  still  the  body  does  not
die. This indicates that
   the breathing, heartbeat, blood circulation, and  other  vital  functions
continue by the grace of the Supersoul. Another inference  we  can  draw  is
that the soul is dependent on  the  Supersoul,  because  if  the  soul  were
completely independent he would not choose to revert to a state  beset  with
suffering. But in fact he cannot stop this reversion,  being  caught  up  in
the states of material existence—waking consciousness,  dreaming,  and  deep
sleep. Therefore, Srila Jiva Gosvami concludes,  the  Supreme  Lord  is  the
fitting object of love, since he is totally free from material bondage.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami summarizes these points.


                              TATTVA SANDARBHA


                            BY SRILA JIVA GOSWAMI




                                  [PART 10]


===== TS.55 =====
NUMBER: 55
SOURCE LABEL: Text 55

TEXT 55
   tad uktam
   anvaya-vyatirekakhyas tarkah syac catur-atmakah
   agamapayi-tad-avadhi-bhedena prathamo matah


   drastr-drsya-vibhagena dvitiyo ’pi matas tatha
   saksi-saksya-vibhagena trtiyah sammatah satam
   duhkhi-premasapadatvena caturthah sukha-bodhakah
   @VCONTINUE = iti. Sri-pippalayano nimim.
   [These arguments] can be summed up as follows:
   Here we have four kinds of arguments in the modes of both  exclusion  and
inclusion.
   The first argument is based on the difference between  what  takes  birth
and dies and {tad-avadhi}. The second is based  on  the  difference  between
the seer and the seen. The third is based on the difference
   between the witness and the witnessed. The fourth argument, given to  aid
our  understanding,  is  based  on  the  difference  between  the  miserable
sufferer and the focus
   of pure love.
   The verse under discussion [Bhag. 11.3.39] is spoken by  Sri  Pippalayana
to King Nimi.


   COMMENTARY
   Summary of Sri Pippalayana’s Teachings
   Here Srila Jiva Gosvami summarizes the conclusions of the last two Texts.
According to Srila Baladeva
   Vidyabhusana, in this
   TEXT the word tarka (literally “reasoning” or “logic”) means “
   inference,”  which  is  one  topic  of  epistemology.  In  the  reasoning
presented in this Text, Jiva Gosvami  uses  inference  both  positively  and
negatively. Positively, there is the general principle that when a soul  and
a body combine, changes occur  that  the  soul  perceives.  Negatively,  one
never perceives changes in the soul or changelessness in the body.  Thus  by
both positive and negative analysis we can infer that the body and the  soul
are distinct. We can apply a similar analysis to the other  three  arguments
set forth in this Text.
   Here we use logic to infer the difference between
   the body and the soul; understanding this difference is the first rung on
the ladder of
   transcendental realization. We can also use logic to infer the difference
between the soul and the Supersoul; understanding  this  difference  is  the
necessary foundation of bhakti-yoga. Here we are not  employing  dry  logic,
which  is  based  on  a  limited  mortal’s  mental  wrangling,  but   rather
transcendental  logic,  which  is  founded  on  the  authority  of   Srimad-
Bhagavatam’s statements and is designed to help  raise  one  to  a  complete
understanding of the  Absolute  Truth.  The  scriptures  and  saintly  sages
encourage sincere souls who seek to distinguish  reality  from  illusion  to
use their intellect for this purpose.
   Only the body takes
   birth, grows old, becomes diseased, and  dies.  The  soul  perceives  all
these changes, and when he identifies himself with his body  he  experiences
them as miseries. Although distinct from his body, because of false ego  the
jiva
   becomes attached to his body and its by-products and thus experiences the
body’s happiness and distress. The Supersoul witnesses the  soul’s  miseries
in his material body but does not experience them as  His  own.  Unperturbed
by the actions and reactions of material bodies, He is always distinct  from
the jiva souls and is the suitable object of their love. We  can  infer  the
existence of the Supersoul from the fact that the soul does not  create  the
elements needed for the maintenance of his body and  that  material  nature,
being inert, cannot create anything without the help of  a  sentient  being.
What’s more, the soul takes no part in maintaining the material body  during
deep sleep, when he is completely aloof from it.
   In this way, knowing the characteristics of the jiva and his relationship
to the body can help us understand something of the Supersoul, Brahman.  And
taking into account the common quality of consciousness shared by  the  jiva
and Brahman, the latter can  be  identified  as  the  nondual  reality,  the
subject of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   All these conclusions are based on an analysis of the  individual  jiva’s
situation. Now Srila Jiva Gosvami begins a new analysis, one  based  on  the
total situation of the universe.


===== TS.56 =====
NUMBER: 56
SOURCE LABEL: Text 56

TEXT 56.1
   evam-bhutanam jivanam cin-matram yat svarupam tayaivakrtya  tad-amsitvena
ca  tad-abhinnam  yat  tattvam  tad  atra  vacyam  iti  vyasti-nirdesa-dvara
proktam.   tad   eva   hy    asraya-samjïakam.    maha-purana-laksana-rupaih
sargadibhir arthaih samasti-nirdesa-dvarapi laksyata ity atraha dvabhyam
   atra sargo visargas ca sthanam posanam utayah
   manv-antaresanukatha nirodho muktir asrayah


   dasamasya visuddhy-artham navanam iha laksanam
   @V1PLUS = varnayanti mahatmanah srutenarthena caïjasa
   By describing these characteristics of the jiva souls, whose inner nature
is pure consciousness, we have in effect described the Supreme Brahman,  the
subject of Srimad-Bhagavatam, from the individual (vyasti)  viewpoint.  This
is so because the Supreme Brahman  is  nondifferent  from  the  jiva  souls,
being the complete  whole  from  whom  they  emanate  in  the  form  of  His
individual  partial  expansions.  Indeed,  He  is  called  the  asraya,  the
fountainhead of all existence. The same nondual reality,  Brahman,  is  also
characterized in aggregate (samasti) cosmic terms in the  list  of  a  major
Purana’s ten topics, beginning with primary creation. This list is given  in
the following two verses:
   “This Srimad-Bhagavatam describes ten subjects: sarga (primary creation),
visarga (secondary creation),  sthana  (maintenance),  posana  (mercy),  uti
(desires),
   manv-antara (reigns of Manus), isanukatha (pastimes of the Lord and
   His devotees), nirodha (annihilation),  mukti  (liberation),  and  asraya
(the substratum or ultimate shelter). To clarify the
   meaning  of  the  tenth   subject,   the   great   souls   describe   the
characteristics of the
   first  nine  subjects  by  prayers,  and  also  by  indirect  and  direct
explanations” [Bhag. 2.10.1–2].


   TEXT 56.2
   manv-antarani  cesanukathas  ca  manv-antaresanukathah.  atra   sargadayo
dasartha laksyanta ity arthah. tatra  ca  dasamasyasrayasya  visuddhy-artham
tattva-jïanartham navanam laksanam svarupam  varnayanti.  nanv  atra  naivam
pratiyate. ata aha srutena srutya  kanthoktyaiva  stuty-adi-sthanesv  aïjasa
saksad varnayanti arthena tatparya-vrttya ca tad-tad-akhyanesu.
   Manv-antaresanukathah is a compound of manv-antara (“periods  of  Manus”)
and isa-anukathah (“narrations of the Lord’s pastimes”).
   This Srimad-Bhagavatam discusses ten topics, beginning with creation, but
the sages’ real purpose in
   describing  the  characteristics  of  the  first  nine  is  to  give   us
systematic, lucid knowledge of the tenth topic. One might object  here  that
the presentation of the other nine topics does not seem to
   explain the tenth topic; we  reply  that  in  the  Bhagavatam  the  sages
explain the tenth topic both directly, by the explicit utterance of  prayers
and other statements, and also indirectly, through the  implied  purport  of
various
   historical accounts.


   COMMENTARY
   The Purpose of the Ten Topics of Srimad-Bhagavatam
   Is to Describe the Supreme Lord
   In previous Texts Srila Jiva Gosvami defined the central focus of Srimad-
Bhagavatam by examining the faith and spiritual experiences of
   Suta Gosvami, Sukadeva Gosvami, and Srila Vyasadeva.  In  the  course  of
this exposition he explained the nature of the jiva.  He  then  went  on  to
analyze the second verse of Srimad-
   Bhagavatam, which declares that the Absolute Reality is the  Bhagavatam’s
subject matter. To further define that  reality  he  also  referred  to  the
Bhagavatam verse beginning vadanti tat tattva-vidah  (1.2.11),  which  names
the three main aspects of the one nondual, supreme
   consciousness (advaya-jïana). He proposed that to understand this nondual
consciousness we should first understand the individual jiva, and  therefore
he discussed the jiva’s position on  the  basis  of  two  Bhagavatam  verses
spoken by
   Pippalayana Rsi.
    The basic ideas established so far concerning the jiva are  that  he  is
conscious, able  to  know  himself  and  other  things,  distinct  from  the
material energy, and free of the six types of  bodily  transformations.  The
analysis up to this  point  has  thus  been  from  the  vyasti  perspective,
focusing on the situation of the individual jivas.
   Now  Jiva  Gosvami  begins  explaining  the  Absolute  Reality  from  the
viewpoint  of  the  aggregate—the  samasti  perspective—and  he  bases   his
explanation on the ten topics treated in  the  Bhagavatam’s  twelve  cantos.
First he quotes two  verses  spoken  by  Sukadeva  Gosvami  (2.10.1–2),  the
second of which states that the reason why scripture describes  such  topics
as
   creation,  maintenance,  annihilation,  and  liberation  is  to  help  us
understand the ultimate topic, the Supreme
   Lord. Indeed, these other topics are  but  descriptions  of  the  Supreme
Lord’s manifold
   potencies. The Lord is the  fountainhead  of  all  these  phenomena,  and
Srimad-Bhagavatam explains them just to illustrate His special
   characteristics. In some places the Bhagavatam introduces prayers to  the
Supreme Lord in the course of describing one  or  more  of  the  other  nine
topics, and in these
   prayers the Supreme Person Himself is the object of description. In other
places the Lord is described directly, as in the
   dialogue  between  Vidura  and  Maitreya  and  that  between  Kapila  and
Devahuti. In yet other
   places, the Bhagavatam glorifies the Lord indirectly through
   historical episodes, such as the accounts of how the Lord saved  Pariksit
Maharaja from
   Asvatthama’s atomic weapon and of how  Sukadeva  Gosvami  was  captivated
when he heard verses about Lord Krsna’s attributes.
   In this way Srila Jiva  Gosvami  shows  that  the  purpose  of  the  nine
preliminary subjects
   discussed in the Bhagavatam is to explain the tenth subject, the  advaya-
jïana,  which  is  also  called  the  asraya  and  is  the  fountainhead  of
everything.
   Every person has two types of characteristics—svarupa (personal) and tata-
stha (marginal)—and the Supreme Personality of Godhead is no  exception.  In
our present  conditioned  state  we  have  no  experience  of  His  personal
features, and so if we hear these described without proper
   COMMENTARY   we  may  misconstrue  them  owing  to  our  strong  material
conditioning.  But  whether  we  adopt  the  aggregate  or  the   individual
viewpoint,   we   can   more   easily   understand   the   Lord’s   marginal
characteristics manifested within the material nature, for they  are  within
the scope our of our personal experience.
   Srila Vyasadeva uses  the  same  approach  in  the  Vedanta-sutra.  After
designating Brahman the subject  of  the  book  in  the  first  sutra—athato
brahma-jijïasa: “Now, therefore, inquire into Brahman”—he begins  discussing
the Lord’s marginal characteristics in the next  sutra—janmady  asya  yatah:
“From Him come the creation, maintenance, and destruction of the universe.”
   Srimad-Bhagavatam similarly discusses ten topics,  presenting  the  first
nine to help us understand the  tenth  topic,  the  asraya.  (Later  in  the
Sandarbhas this asraya will be identified more fully  as  Lord  Sri  Krsna.)
The first nine topics of Srimad-Bhagavatam deal with  various  potencies  of
the Lord, such as His creative  potency,  sarga-sakti.  Understanding  these
topics helps us appreciate the  Supreme  Lord  as  the  possessor  of  these
potencies. Then we can come to properly apprehend His personal features  and
pastimes, which are  narrated  in  the  Bhagavatam’s  Tenth  Canto.  Without
studying the nine preliminary topics of the Bhagavatam, we run the  risk  of
viewing His form and pastimes superficially, of concluding that Krsna is  an
ordinary human being endowed with some extraordinary  powers.  But  this  is
far from the truth. Lord Krsna therefore says in the Bhagavad-gita (9.11):
   avajananti mam mudha manusim tanum asritam
   param bhavam ajananto mama bhuta-mahesvaram
“Fools deride Me when I descend in the human  form.  They  do  not  know  My
transcendental nature as the Supreme Lord of  all  that  be.”  By  contrast,
those who do understand the Lord’s transcendental nature  are  described  as
follows:
   janma karma ca me divyam evam yo vetti tattvatah
   tyaktva deham punar janma naiti mam eti so ’rjuna
“One who knows the transcendental nature of  My  appearance  and  activities
does not, upon leaving the body, take  his  birth  again  in  this  material
world, but attains My eternal abode, O Arjuna” (Bg. 4.9).
   Therefore, wishing to lead us  to  the  highest  plane  of  transcendence
through a proper  understanding  of  the  Bhagavatam’s  tenth  subject,  the
summum bonum, Sukadeva Gosvami  first  explains  the  first  nine  subjects.
Clearly, then, we should  study  Srimad-Bhagavatam  in  the  order  Sukadeva
Gosvami presented it, from the first verse onward.
   Unfortunately, unscrupulous persons do not study the Bhagavatam verse  by
verse, cCanto by cCanto, but rather jump to the Tenth Canto. Yet  they  pose
themselves as learned scholars of the Bhagavatam. Another failing  of  these
false Bhagavatam scholars is their  neglect  of  the  mandatory  requirement
that one must hear the Bhagavatam at the feet of a bona fide guru coming  in
Vaisnava  disciplic  succession.  Because  of  this  omission  they   cannot
properly relish the ripened fruit of the Vedic tree  of  knowledge.  To  all
such persons Lord Krsna declares in the Bhagavad-gita (7.25):
   naham prakasah sarvasya yoga-maya-samavrtah
   mudho ’yam nabhijanati loko mam ajam avyayam
“I am never manifest to  the  foolish  and  unintelligent.  For  them  I  am
covered by My Yogamaya, and therefore they do not know that I am unborn  and
infallible.”
   The most basic requirement for spiritual study,  stipulated  in  all  the
Vedic scriptures, is  that  one  must  respectfully  approach  a  bona  fide
spiritual master, humbly serve him, and submissively inquire from him.  Then
all the secrets of the Vedic teachings will  be  revealed.  This  injunction
applies to every student,  even  those  who  are  great  intellectuals.  The
Svetasvatara Upanisad (6.28) therefore states:
   yasya deve para bhaktir yatha deve tatha gurau
   tasyaite kathita hy arthah prakasante mahatmanah
“Only unto those great souls who have implicit  faith  in  and  devotion  to
both the Supreme Lord and the spiritual master are all the imports of  Vedic
knowledge revealed.” Nothing is revealed to the student  without  the  grace
of the spiritual master. Therefore to disregard the principle that one  must
approach  a  spiritual  master  to  understand  the  Absolute  Truth  is  to
disrespect the Vedic teachings from the  outset  and  ensure  failure.  Lord
Krsna confirms this in the Bhagavad-gita (16.23):
   yah sastra-vidhim utsrjya vartate kama-karatah
   na sa siddhim avapnoti na sukham na param gatim
“He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own  whims
attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.”
   Therefore, to unravel the mystery of Srimad-Bhagavatam one should  follow
in the footsteps of the previous acaryas and refrain  from  jumping  to  the
esoteric pastimes described in the Tenth Canto.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami begins explaining  each  of  the  ten  topics  by
quoting their definitions from
   Srimad-Bhagavatam.


===== TS.57 =====
NUMBER: 57
SOURCE LABEL: Text 57

TEXT 57.1
   tam eva dasamam vispastayitum tesam dasanam vyutpadikam sapta-slokim aha
   bhuta-matrendriya-dhiyam janma sarga udahrtah
   brahmano guna-vaisamyad visargah paurusah smrtah
   @VCONTINUE = bhutani khadini matrani  ca  sabdadini  indriyani  ca.  dhi-
sabdena   mahad-ahankarau.   gunanam    vaisamyat    parinamat.    brahmanah
paramesvarat kartur bhutadinam janma  sargah.  puruso  vairajo  brahma  tat-
krtah paurusas caracara-sargo visarga ity arthah.
   To elucidate the tenth subject, Sri Sukadeva Gosvami speaks seven  verses
defining each of the  ten  subjects.  [Four  of  the  seven  verses  are  as
follows:]
   “The primary creation of the five gross elements, the
   five subtle sense objects, the five senses,  the  mahat-tattva,  and  the
false ego, resulting from the
   disturbance in the material modes’  equilibrium  caused  by  the  Supreme
Lord, is
   known as sarga. The secondary  creation,  effected  by  Lord  Brahma,  is
called visarga” [Bhag. 2.10.3].
   The bhutas mentioned here are the five gross material elements, beginning
with ether. The  matras  are  the  subtle  elements—sound  and  so  on.  The
indriyas are the perceptive senses. The word dhi (“intelligence”)  indicates
the totality of unmanifest matter, together with  false  ego.  Brahman,  the
supreme controller, generates these physical  and  nonphysical  elements  by
causing the modes of  material  nature  to  become  unbalanced  and  produce
transformations. This is called sarga (“creation.”) The secondary  creation,
by Lord Brahma, is called  visarga.  Since  he  is  the  vairaja-purusa,  or
“universal person,” his creation is also called
   paurusa. Visarga is the sending forth  of  moving  and  nonmoving  living
beings.


   TEXT 57.2
   sthitir vaikuntha-vijayah posanam tad-anugrahah
   manv-antarani sad-dharma utayah karma-vasanah


   avataranucaritam hares casyanuvartinam
   pumsam isa-kathah prokta nanakhyanopabrmhitah
   @VCONTINUE = vaikunthasya  bhagavato  vijayah  srstanam  tat-tan-maryada-
palanenotkarsah sthitih sthanam. tatah sthitesu  sva-bhaktesu  tasyanugrahah
posanam.  manv-antarani   tat-tan-manv-antara-sthitanam   manv-adinam   tad-
anugrhitanam satam caritani tany eva dharmas  tad-upasanakhyah  sad-dharmah.
tatraiva   sthitau   nana-karma-vasana    utayah.    sthitav    eva    harer
avataranucaritam asyanuvartinam ca katha isanukathah prokta ity arthah.
   “Sthiti is the victory of Lord Visnu, and posana is the grace He  bestows
on His
   devotees. The word manv-antara indicates the principles of transcendental
religion, while uti refers to desires for  material  activities.  Isanukatha
indicates the various descriptions of the Lord’s
   pastimes in His incarnations, and also the descriptions of  His  faithful
devotees’ activities” [Bhag. 2.10.4–5].
   Sthiti  (“maintenance”)  is  vaikuntha-vijaya,  the   victory   of   Lord
Vaikuntha, the Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  In  other  words,  sthiti
indicates the supreme glory  of  the  Lord  shown  by  His  maintaining  all
created beings in  their  respective  situations  under  His  laws.  Posanam
(“sustenance”) indicates how He maintains His
   devotees by bestowing His  grace  on  them.  Manv-antarani  (“periods  of
Manus”) indicates the histories of the Manus and  other  saintly  kings  who
ruled during the Manus’ reigns, and also  the  histories  of  other  saintly
people who lived during  those  periods  and  received  the  Supreme  Lord’s
special  favor.  The  deeds  of  these  saints  are   themselves   religious
standards,  establishing  the  sad-dharma  (“transcendental  religion”)   of
worshiping the Lord. With regard to universal maintenance,  uti  (“impetuses
for action”)  are  desires  for  various  fruitive  activities.  Isanukathah
(“narrations about the Lord”) are historical accounts of the Lord’s
   pastimes in His various incarnations, as well as accounts of His faithful
followers’ activities.


   TEXT 57.3
   nirodho ’syanusayanam atmanah saha saktibhih
   muktir hitvanyatha-rupam svarupena vyavasthitih
   @VCONTINUE =  sthity-anantaram  catmano  jivasya  saktibhih  svopadhibhih
sahasya harer anusayanam hari-sayananugatatvena sayanam nirodha ity  arthah.
tatra harer sayanam prapaïcam prati drsti-nimilanam  jivanam  sayanam  tatra
laya iti jïeyam. tatraiva nirodhe ’nyatha-rupam avidyadhyastam  ajïatvadikam
hitva svarupena vyavasthitir muktih.
   “The merging of the living entity, along with his conditioning, with  the
mystic lying down of the Maha-Visnu is called the winding up of  the  cosmic
manifestation (nirodha). Liberation (mukti) is the  permanent  situation  of
the form of the living entity after he gives up  the  changeable  gross  and
subtle material bodies” [Bhag. 2.10.6].
   When annihilation occurs after a period of  universal  maintenance,  Lord
Hari goes to sleep and the jivas follow Him along with their
   energies, their upadhis. This is  called  nirodha  (“winding  up”).  Lord
Hari’s “going to sleep” consists of His closing His  eyes  to  the  material
creation, and the jivas’ “going to sleep” consists  of  their  merging  into
Lord Hari. If a jiva in that merged state has freed himself from his  false,
acquired nature—the ignorance and other qualities  superimposed  on  him  by
material illusion—he attains his  original  nature;  this  is  called  mukti
(“liberation”).


   COMMENTARY
   Definition of Srimad-Bhagavatam’s First Nine Topics
   Understanding  the  Supreme  Lord  means  knowing  Him  along  with   His
potencies, just as understanding the sun means knowing  it  along  with  its
potency, sunshine. According  to  the  Second  Canto  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam,
tenth chapter, the material world is a creation of  the  Lord  and  reflects
His personality. This world perpetually goes  through  cycles  of  creation,
maintenance,  and  annihilation.  During  annihilation  all   the   material
elements are unmanifest because they have merged into the original,  dormant
state of
   material nature, called prakrti or pradhana. In this phase the three
   modes of nature are in balance and thus  inactive.  At  the  end  of  the
period of annihilation the Supreme
   Lord agitates the modes of nature by glancing upon  them,  and  then  the
next stage of creation begins. This agitated state of the material modes  is
called the mahat-tattva, which,
   when further activated by the time factor, gives rise  to  material  ego,
ahankara. From ahankara  come  the  five  gross  material  elements  (earth,
water, fire, air, and ether), the five subtle elements (smell, taste,  form,
tactility, and sound),
   and the five perceptive senses  (the  senses  of  smell,  taste,  vision,
touch, and hearing). This phase of creation is called sarga, or the  primary
creation. The subsequent creation is conducted by Lord Brahma and is  called
visarga, or  the  secondary  creation.  Brahma  is  also  called  Purusa  or
Vairaja.
   Lord  Visnu  oversees  the  maintenance  of  the  rules  and  regulations
governing universal affairs,  and  this  maintenance  is  called  sthiti  or
sthana. The maintenance function shows Visnu’s preeminence over Lord  Brahma
and Lord
   Siva, who are in charge of the secondary  creation  and  of  destruction,
respectively. To carry out the function of sthiti the Lord
   incarnates in every millennium, as He states in the Bhagavad-gita (4.8):
   paritranaya sadhunam vinasaya ca duskrtam
   dharma-samsthapanarthaya sambhavami yuge yuge
“To deliver the pious and to annihilate the miscreants, as well as
   to re-establish the principles of religion, I advent myself millennium
   after millennium.” And the grace the Lord showers on the pious is  called
posana.
   Each day of Lord Brahma contains fourteen periods, each of which is ruled
over by a Manu. The Manus are godly
   persons empowered to look after the welfare of all human beings. The
   activities of each Manu, along with  the  deeds  saintly  people  perform
during the Manus’ reigns, constitute manv-antara. How these saintly  persons
behave and worship is called
   sad-dharma.
   Impelled  by  their  karma,  living  beings  perform   various   material
activities during the sthiti, or
   maintenance, of the creation, and these activities give rise to various
   desires for further material activities. These desires, in  the  form  of
impressions within the mind, are called uti. The descriptions of the  Lord’s
pastimes with His associates during
   His incarnations in this material world are called isanukatha.
   The creation cycle begins when the Lord glances at  material  nature:  sa
iksata lokan nu srjeti, sa imal lokan asrjata. “He glanced  and  desired  to
create people. Indeed, He created them” (Aitareya Up. 1.1).


When it is time for annihilation, the Lord turns His eyes away from the
   creation, and this turning away is called His sleep, or cosmic rest. Next
all the material
   elements become unmanifest in the reverse order in which  they  appeared,
and the material
   nature then exists in equilibrium. At that time the jivas give  up  their
gross
   bodies, but they remain conditioned by their  subtle  bodies,  which  are
composed of their karmic impressions. This inactive state of the jivas is
   called sleep, corresponding to  the  Lord’s  sleep,  and  this  phase  of
existence is called nirodha. When the time comes  for  the  creation  cycle,
the jivas receive bodies according to part of the karma they accrued in  the
previous cycle.
   During the maintenance period, if a living being takes to the  devotional
service of the Lord and attains perfection he is freed from both his  subtle

   and gross bodies and is situated in his original nature.  This  condition
is
   called mukti, which is also a type of nirodha. However,  in  contrast  to
the nirodha that occurs at the time  of  universal  annihilation,  when  the
jiva attains mukti he is not compelled to take birth again in  the  material
world. Rather, all his miseries come to an end and he enters
   the spiritual planets,  where  he  eternally  resides  in  his  original,
spiritual form. One can attain this state  of  eternal  liberation  only  by
practicing devotional service to Lord Krsna, as Srila Vyasadeva saw  in  His
trance.
   The Supreme Lord, the tenth topic discussed in Srimad-Bhagavatam, is  the
foundation of the other  nine  topics.  The  events  that  occur  under  the
headings of these topics all take place by His  potency;  indeed,  the  very
reason why the Srimad-Bhagavatam describes these topics is to help  us  come
to know the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for a person  is  known  by  His
works and attributes.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami
   defines the asraya-tattva, the fountainhead of all existence, who is  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead.


===== TS.58 =====
NUMBER: 58
SOURCE LABEL: Text 58

TEXT 58
   abhasas ca nirodhas ca yato ’sty adhyavasiyate
   sa asrayah param brahma paramatmeti sabdyate
   @VCONTINUE = abhasah srstir nirodho layas ca yato  bhavaty  adhyavasiyata
upalabhyate jivanam  jïanendriyesu  prakasate  ca  sa  brahmeti  paramatmeti
prasiddha asrayah kathyate. iti-sabdah prakararthas tena  bhagavan  iti  ca.
asya vivrttir agre vidheya.
   “The supreme one, who is celebrated as the Supreme Being or  the  Supreme
Soul, is the supreme source of the cosmic  manifestation,  as  well  as  its
reservoir and winding up. Thus He is the Supreme Fountainhead, the  Absolute
Truth” (Bhag. 2.10.7).
   In this verse the abhasa (“appearance”) is  material  creation,  and  the
nirodha (“cessation”) is its
   dissolution. The word yatah refers to the  one  from  whom  the  creation
emanates,  by  whom  it  is  made   perceivable   to   the   jivas’   senses
(adhyavasiyate), and in whom it is dissolved. That renowned fountainhead  of
existence—the asraya—is known as Brahman (the Supreme Truth)  and  Paramatma
(the Supersoul). Here  the  word  iti  expresses  the  idea  of  a  complete
category, thus implying that Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality  of  Godhead,
is included as well. Later we shall explain the asraya in detail.


   COMMENTARY
   Defining Srimad-Bhagavatam’s Tenth Topic
   Srimad-Bhagavatam’s  description  of  the   aforementioned   ten   topics
culminates in the description of the asraya-tattva. A book that  treats  too
many subjects will bewilder the reader and make it difficult for him to
   ascertain its ultimate purpose. This is clearly not  the  case  with  the
Bhagavatam, however, for as stated here, the shelter of
   all the topics is the Supreme Lord. None of the other topics can be
   described without reference to the Lord, and indeed the whole reason  why
Srila Vyasadeva included them was to
   throw light on the Lord’s energies and activities. In other words, Srimad-
Bhagavatam is  really  about  only  one  topic—the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead.
   The Lord creates the world, maintains it, and supplies the living  beings
with the senses
   and intelligence to perceive it. He
   blesses these suffering jivas with the Vedic  instructions  so  that  the
seriously inquisitive can
   understand Him, and also with the association of His  devotees  to  guide
them. Despite these blessings, most jivas remain engaged in
   material activities, but some develop a desire to know  the  Lord.  These
can receive  His  grace  and  eventually  attain  mukti,  liberation,  which
entails becoming
   situated in one’s own svarupa, or original nature. This is possible  only
by the Lord’s mercy, which is  available       to  one  who  understands  in
truth the asraya-
   tattva described in Srimad-Bhagavatam. Thus it is rightly said  that  the
purpose of the other nine topics is
   to explain the tenth topic, the asraya, who is the source of creation and
annihilation. (The asraya is called
   Brahman by followers of jïana-yoga, and Paramatma by followers of
   astanga-yoga.)
   The word
   ca (“and”) in this verse (Bhag.  2.10.7)  indicates  the  topics  of  the
Bhagavatam not explicitly mentioned in the verse, such as
   posana. The word iti indicates Bhagavan, the term that the  followers  of
bhakti-yoga use to designate the asraya. Thus this verse echoes  one  quoted
earlier, namely the verse  which includes  the  words  brahmeti  paramatmeti
bhagavan iti sabdyate (Bhag. 1.2.11), which states that the nondual  supreme

   consciousness is called Brahman, Paramatma, and Bhagavan.
   In the next
   TEXT  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  gives  further  arguments  to   support   the
proposition that the Supreme Lord is the asraya, or shelter of
   everything.


===== TS.59 =====
NUMBER: 59
SOURCE LABEL: Text 59

TEXT 59.1
   sthitau ca tatrasraya-svarupam aparoksanubhavena  vyasti-dvarapi  spastam
darsayitum adhyatmadi-vibhagam aha
   yo ’dhyatmiko ’yam purusah so ’sav evadhidaivikah
   yas tatrobhaya-vicchedah puruso hy adhibhautikah


   ekam ekatarabhave yada nopalabhamahe
   @V1PLUS = tritayam tatra yo veda sa atma svasrayasrayah
   Sukadeva Gosvami next discusses the
   divisions of adhyatmika, adhidaivika, and adhibhautika. He does  this  to
clarify the nature of the asraya, which he describes  by  referring  to  the
direct, common experience of the individual microcosm:
   “This adhyatmika-purusa is the same as the adhidaivika-purusa, and he who
creates the
   differentiation between these two is called the  adhibhautika-purusa.  In
the absence of any one of these we do not
   perceive the other two. He who knows these three is the Lord, who,  being
independent of everything else, is the support of His own
   self and is the true asraya” [Bhag. 2.10.8–9].


   TEXT 59.2
   yo ’yam adhyatmikah  purusas  caksur-adi-karanabhimani  drasta  jivah  sa
evadhidaivikas caksur-ady-adhisthata suryadih. deha-srsteh purvam  karananam
adhisthanabhavenaksamataya      karana-prakasa-kartrtvabhimani-tat-sahayayor
ubhayor api tayor vrtti-bhedanudayena jivatva-matravisesat.  tatas  cobhayah
karanabhimani-tad-adhisthatr-devata-rupo   dvi-rupo   vicchedo   yasmat   sa
adhibhautikas caksur-golakady-upalaksito drsyo dehah  purusa  iti  purusasya
jivasyopadhih `sa va esa puruso ’nna-rasa-mayah' ity-adi-sruteh.
   The jiva, the seer, who identifies himself as the owner of his  eyes  and
other senses, is the adhyatmika person. He is indeed  also  the  adhidaivika
person, the sun and other deities presiding over the eyes and other  senses.

   Before the physical body is created, the senses have  nowhere  to  reside
and  so  cannot  act.  Consequently  at  this  point  the   adhyatmika   and
adhidaivika persons are indistinguishable, since there has yet to  appear  a
distinction between the  functions  of  the  ordinary  jivas,  who  consider
themselves independent actors and the illuminators of their senses, and  the
deities who help them.
   And that person because of whom there arises the  conception  of  duality
between the presumed owner of the senses  and  their  presiding  deities  is
called adhibhautika, the visible body consisting of the  eyeball  and  other
physical sense organs. This physical body is said to be a  “person”  because
it is an upadhi superimposed upon the  real  person,  the  jiva.  The  sruti
states, “This [adhibhautika] person  consists  of  food  and  vital  fluids”
[Taittiriya Up. 2.1.1].


   COMMENTARY
   The Lord Is the Ultimate Shelter
   In the previous
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami showed that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the asraya-tattva, the
   support of everything,  even  from  the  macrocosmic  viewpoint.  Now  he
further
   explains that the Lord is the support of each individual in his day-
   to-day sensory experiences.
   The originally pure living  being  who  misidentifies  himself  with  the
senses is
   called the adhyatmika-purusa, the presiding deities of the senses are
   called the adhidaivika-purusa, and the visible physical body, along with
   the sense objects, is called the adhibhautika-purusa.
   The adhibhautika-purusa creates the distinction between  the  adhyatmika-
purusa and the adhidaivika-purusa. Before  the  birth  of  one’s  body,  one
cannot distinguish
   the latter two purusas because they are merged as if they  are  the  same
jiva. In this
   regard Sripada Baladeva Vidyabhusana writes, dehotpatteh purvam api
   jivena sardham indriyani tad-devatas ca santy eva: “Even before the
   creation of the gross body, the senses and their  presiding  deities  are
present with the jiva.” At this stage there is no  distinction  between  the
deities and the jivas,  because  no  physical  body  exists  yet.  When  the
physical body comes into existence the senses come and sit in it, and  their
respective presiding deities take
   charge of them. At that time one can distinctly perceive  the  activities
of the presiding deities. The eyes, ears, and other senses that  we  see  in
the physical body
   are not the real senses: rather,  they  are  the  seats  for  the  actual
senses, which are subtle. Lord Krsna confirms this in the fifteenth  chapter
of the
   Bhagavad-gita. After asserting that the  living  entity  is  His  eternal
fragmental part, the Lord states that the jiva attracts the  mind  and  five
senses, which are  situated  in  material  nature,  meaning  that  the  jiva
accepts them as his own. Krsna then says that when the soul quits  his  body
he carries his five senses and his mind  from  their  seats  into  his  next
body, just as the air carries aromas. Obviously, at the time  of  death  the
visible ears and eyes do not
   disappear. Rather, the subtle senses situated in  them,  along  with  the
mind, are carried away by the soul.
   Another reason why the physical body is called purusa,  or  “person,”  is
that the soul identifies himself with it. This illusion prompts a person  to

   say “I am sick” when actually his body is sick. All bodily  designations,
such as “small man,” “tall man,” “American,” “Indian,”  “boy,”  and  “girl,”
are based on the jiva’s illusion that he is the  material  body.  The  Vedic
statement Srila Jiva Gosvami quotes in this
   TEXT confirms the usage of the term
   purusa for the body.
   In the next
   TEXT Jiva Gosvami explains the second of the  two  Bhagavatam  verses  he
quoted in
   TEXT 59.1, namely 2.10.9.


===== TS.60 =====
NUMBER: 60
SOURCE LABEL: Text 60

TEXT 60.1
   `ekam ekatarabhave'  ity  esam  anyonya-sapeksa-siddhatvena  anasrayatvam
darsayati. tatha hi drsyam vina  tat-pratity-anumeyam  karanam  na  sidhyati
napi drasta na ca tad vina karana-pravrtty-anumeyas tad-adhisthata  suryadir
na ca tam vina karanam pravartate na ca tad vina drsyam ity  ekatarasyabhava
ekam nopalabhamahe. tatra tada tat  tritayam  alocanatmakena  pratyayena  yo
veda  saksitaya  pasyati  sa  paramatma  asrayah.   tesam   api   parasparam
asrayatvam astiti tad-vyavacchedartham visesanam svasrayo  ’nanyasrayah,  sa
casav  anyesam   asrayas   ceti.   tatramsamsinoh   suddha-jiva-paramatmanor
abhedamsa-svikarenaivasraya uktah.
   The verse beginning ekam ekatarabhave [Bhag. 2.10.9] shows how  the  fact
that all of these [purusas] are mutually  dependent  in  effect  means  that
none of them is the asraya. The  explanation  is  as  follows:  Without  the
presence of the visible object there  is  no  basis  for  the  existence  of
either the sense organ (whose presence is inferred from  perception  of  the
object) or the seer. And without the seer, the sun-god and  other  presiding
deities  of  perception  also  have  no  basis  for  existing.  Without  the
presiding deity of sight, the sense of sight cannot  act,  and  without  the
sense of sight there can be no perception. Thus in the absence  of  any  one
[of the three purusas] we cannot find either of the others. Such  being  the
case, the one who knows all three of  these,  perceiving  them  visually  as
their witness—namely the Supersoul—is indeed the actual asraya, or  shelter.
In refutation of the idea that  the  three  purusas  are  shelters  for  one
another, the Supersoul is specifically characterized as  svasraya,  His  own
shelter, meaning that He has  no  other  shelter  and  is  consequently  the
shelter of all others. In this con
   TEXT the living entity is also called asraya, but only in  the  sense  of
emphasizing  the  partial  nondifference  between  the  pure  jiva  and  the
Supersoul, who are related as part and whole, respectively.


   TEXT 60.2
   atah `paro ’pi manute ’nartham’ iti
   jagrat-svapna-susuptam ca gunato buddhi-vrttayah
   tasam vilaksano jivah saksitvena viniscitah
   @VCONTINUE = iti `suddho  vicaste  hy  avisuddha-kartuh'  ity-ady-uktasya
saksi-samjïinah  suddha-jivasyasrayatvam  na  sankaniyam.   atha   va   nanv
adhyatmikadinam apy asrayatvam asty eva. satyam  tathapi  parasparasrayatvan
na tatrasrayata-kaivalyam iti te tv asraya-sabdena mukhyataya  nocyanta  ity
aha, ekam iti.
   The pure jiva  is  designated  as  the  witness  in  such  statements  as
“Although transcendental, he considers himself a  material  product”  [Bhag.
1.7.5]; “Waking awareness, dream, and deep sleep are the  functions  of  the
mind, caused by the modes of material nature. The individual soul  has  been
ascertained to be distinct from these functions, as  their  witness”  [Bhag.
11.13.27]; and “The pure one witnesses the actions of the impure agent,  the
mind” [Bhag. 5.11.12]. The pure jiva being  characterized  thus,  it  cannot
reasonably be proposed that this jiva, known as the witness, is the asraya.
   Alternatively, one might propose that the aspects of adhyatmika and so on
are also asrayas. We answer that this is true, but  still,  since  they  are
dependent on one another, none of them is exclusively  the  asraya;  as  the
verse beginning ekam states, it is not in the  direct,  literal  sense  that
they are referred to as asrayas .


   TEXT 60.3
   tarhi saksina evastam asrayatvam tatraha  tritayam  iti.  sa  atma  saksi
jivas tu yah svasrayo ’nanyasrayah paramatma sa evasrayo  yasya  tatha-bhuta
ity anayor bhedah. vaksyate ca hamsa-guhya-stave
   @VL1 = sarvam puman veda gunams ca taj-jïo
   @VL2 = na veda sarva-jïam anantam ide
   @VCONTINUE = iti. tasmad abhasas  cety-adinoktah  paramatmaivasraya  iti.
Sri-sukah.
   “Then let the witness (the jiva) be the shelter.”  In  answer  the  words
beginning tritayam are spoken: The witnessing  self,  the  jiva,  is  called
svasraya (“his own shelter”), but in fact his asraya is the  Supersoul,  who
has no other asraya; this is the difference between the two. Thus the Hamsa-
guhya prayers [Bhag. 6.4.25] say, “A person who knows the  modes  of  nature
may know everything about them, but he does not know the all-knowing one.  I
worship that unlimited Lord.” Thus it is that the  Supersoul,  described  in
such statements as the one beginning abhasas ca  [Bhag.  2.10.7],  is  alone
the asraya.
   The verse under discussion [Bhag. 2.10.9] was spoken by Sri Suka.


   COMMENTARY
   The Jiva Is Not the Ultimate Shelter
   Srila Jiva Gosvami shows here that except for the Supreme Lord none can
   be the asraya, Srimad-Bhagavatam’s tenth topic. From a cursory look,  the
jivas and presiding deities appear to be
   the asrayas. The jiva, or conditioned soul, is the asraya for  his  gross
body, and the presiding
   deities are the asraya for the senses. But none of them  can  be  asrayas
independent of the others. For
   example, without a gross body the conditioned jiva would be unable to see
a flower because
   the distinction between the presiding deity of  the  eyes  and  the  jiva
would not then be manifest. Conversely, when the body is manifest, then  the
senses come and sit in their respective seats and are
   presided over by their respective demigods. Still, if the demigods do not
provide support, the senses cannot perceive. The presiding deity of
   the eye, for example, is the sun. Without the sun’s light the eye  cannot
perceive  visible  objects,  even  with  the  jiva’s  support.  For   proper
perception all three supports must be present:  the  jiva  (the  adhyatmika-
purusa), the gross body (the adhibhautika-purusa),  and  the  demigods  (the
adhidaivika-purusa).
   The one who witnesses all the activities of these three  purusas  is  the
Paramatma, who is the asraya for Himself as well as  the  jiva.  He  is  the
ultimate
   asraya. Although the jiva witnesses his own various mental states, he  is
not their ultimate basis. Sometimes the jiva is
   referred to as the asraya in consideration of his being a minute fraction
of the Lord and thus nondifferent from  Him,  but  the  jiva  is  never  the
asraya in the primary sense.
   The jiva is the marginal energy of the Supreme Lord, the  energetic,  and
as such the jiva is always dependent on Him.  Still,  because  the  jiva  is
part and
   parcel of the Lord he has some of His characteristics in very
   minute degree, just as a drop of ocean water  has  some  of  the  ocean’s
qualities. But only some: The ocean has waves, tides, and  storms,  none  of
which a single drop can accommodate. Also, unlike the drop of  ocean  water,
the ocean shelters the whole
   oceanic world and is suitable for  sailing  or  surfing.  Similarly,  the
Supreme Lord is the shelter and source of happiness  for  all  existence,  a
position no sane jiva can claim. Thus the jiva, although one with  the  Lord
in some respects, should not be considered the object of
   worship independent of the Lord, the basis of all existence. The Lord  is
the Supreme substratum or shelter
   for Himself as well as others. This is the import of Sukadeva
   Gosvami’s statements explaining the various topics treated in Srimad-
   Bhagavatam.
   Jiva Gosvami will now quote Srila Suta Gosvami as the  latter  draws  the
same conclusion  from  a  slightly  different  angle  while  explaining  the
characteristics of a Maha-purana.


===== TS.61 =====
NUMBER: 61
SOURCE LABEL: Text 61

TEXT 61.1
   asya Sri-bhagavatasya maha-puranatva-vyaïjaka-laksanam prakarantarena  ca
vadann api tasyaivasrayatvam aha dvayena
   sargo ’syatha visargas ca vrtti raksantarani ca
   vamso vamsanucaritam samstha hetur apasrayah


   dasabhir laksanair yuktam puranam tad-vido viduh
   kecit païca-vidham brahman mahad-alpa-vyavasthaya
   @VCONTINUE = antarani manv-antarani.
   In the following two verses Sri Suta Gosvami describes in a different way
the characteristics of Srimad-Bhagavatam that qualify it as  a  Maha-purana,
and in so doing he affirms that the Supreme Lord alone is the asraya:
   “O brahmana, authorities on the matter understand a Purana to contain ten
characteristic topics: sarga, the creation of this  universe;  visarga,  the
subsequent creation of worlds and beings;  vrtti,  the  maintenance  of  all
living beings; raksa, the sustenance of all  living  beings;  antarani,  the
rule of various Manus; vamsa, the dynasties of great  kings;  vamsanucarita,
the activities of such kings; samstha, annihilation; hetu,  motivation;  and
apasraya, the supreme shelter. Other scholars state that the  great  Puranas
deal with these ten topics while lesser Puranas may deal with  five”  [Bhag.
12.7.9–10].
   Here the word antarani refers to periods of Manus.


   TEXT 61.2
   païca-vidham
   sargas ca pratisargas ca vamso manv-antarani ca
   vamsanucaritam ceti puranam païca-laksanam
   @VCONTINUE = iti kecid vadanti. sa ca  mata-bhedo  mahad-alpa-vyavasthaya
maha-puranam  alpa-puranam  iti  bhinnadhikaranatvena.   yady   api   visnu-
puranadav api dasapi tani laksyante tathapi païcanam eva  pradhanyenoktatvad
alpatvam.
   According to some, a
   Purana has five characteristics:
   “The five characteristics of a Purana are  sarga,  creation;  pratisarga,
annihilation; vamsa, genealogy;  manv-antarani,  the  reign  of  Manus;  and
vamsanucaritam, the activities of dynasties  of  kings  and  successions  of
saints” [Matsya Pur. 53.65].
   This  difference  of  opinion  is  due  to  the  different  topics   that
characterize greater and lesser Puranas. Although Puranas such as the
   Visnu Purana discuss all ten topics, these Puranas are still
   considered lesser because they discuss only five of the topics in depth.


   TEXT 61.3
   atra dasanam arthanam skandhesu yatha-kramam praveso na vivaksitas  tesam
dvadasa-sankhyatvat. dvitiya-skandhoktanam tesam  trtiyadisu  yatha-sankhyam
na samavesah.  nirodhadinam  dasamadisv  astama-varjam  anyesam  apy  anyesu
yathokta-laksanataya samavesanasakyatvad eva.
   In Srimad-Bhagavatam there is no intention of discussing the  ten  topics
consecutively, one per canto; after all, the Bhagavatam has  twelve  cantos.
Nor should one think that
   because the ten topics are listed in the Second Canto they
   can be found one after another from Canto Three to Twelve, because the
    three topics of nirodha, mukti, and asraya  can  all  be  found  in  the
Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth Cantos. Nor will one find the remaining  topics
in order in the other cantos, with the exception of the Eighth Canto.


   TEXT 61.4
   tad uktam Sri-svamibhir eva
   dasame krsna-sat-kirti-vitanayopavarnyate
   dharma-glani-nimittas tu nirodho dusta-bhu-bhujam
   prakrtadi-caturdha yo nirodhah sa tu varnitah
   @VCONTINUE = iti. ato ’tra skandhe Sri-krsna-rupasyasrayasyaiva  varnana-
pradhanyam tair vivaksitam. uktam ca svayam eva
   dasame dasamam laksyam asritasraya-vigraham
   @VCONTINUE = iti. evam anyatrapy unneyam.
   Srila  Sridhara  Svami  also  indicates  this  [absence   of   a   strict
correspondence between the Bhagavatam’s topics and cantos]:
   “To  spread  Lord  Krsna’s  glories,  the  Tenth  Canto   describes   how
unrighteous rulers suffered annihilation (nirodha) because they
   deviated from religious principles. The four types  of  annihilations  of
the total material nature have already described earlier."
   Sridhara Svami’s intention here is to show that the Tenth Canto primarily
discusses the asraya, the form of  Sri  Krsna.  As  Sridhara  Svami  himself
states, “The subject of the Tenth Canto is  the  tenth  topic,  the  Supreme
Lord, who shelters His dependent devotees.”
   We can draw similar conclusions about the other cantos.


   TEXT 61.5
   atah  prayasah  sarve  ’rthah  sarvesv  eva   skandhesu   gaunatvena   va
mukhyatvena va nirupyanta ity eva  tesam  abhimatam.  srutenarthena  caïjasa
ity atra tathaiva pratipannam sarvatra tat-tat-sambhavat. tatas ca prathama-
dvitiyayor api maha-puranatayam pravesah syat. tasmat kramo na grhitah.


Thus Sridhara Svami would agree with us that virtually every  canto  touches
on all ten topics, either directly or indirectly. It is in  the  same  light
that we should understand the statement “these  topics  are  described  here
either directly or indirectly” [Bhag. 2.10.2], since  we  actually  do  find
these  topics  discussed  both  directly  and  indirectly   throughout   the
Bhagavatam. And for the same reason we should recognize that the  First  and
Second Cantos also belong to this Maha-purana. Therefore we  do  not  accept
the idea
   that these topics are discussed in a strict sequence.


   COMMENTARY
   Sri Suta Gosvami Lists the Ten Topics of Srimad-Bhagavatam
   Previously Srila Jiva Gosvami showed that Suta Gosvami, Sukadeva Gosvami,
and Srila Vyasadeva all agreed  about  what  is  the  essential  message  of
Srimad-Bhagavatam. Here Srila Jiva Gosvami reiterates this conclusion
   by citing Suta Gosvami’s statements regarding the
   characteristics of a Maha-purana. Although the ten topics Sri Suta  lists
seem to differ from those listed by Sukadeva  Gosvami,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami
shows that in essence they are the  same.  In  the  Bhavartha-dipika,  while
commenting on verse 12.7.9 of Srimad-Bhagavatam, Sridhara Svami  offers  the
following reconciliation between Sukadeva’s list  and  Suta’s  list:  “Sarga
and visarga
   are found in both lists. Sthana in the first list is called vrtti in  the
second, posana is called raksa, uti is called hetu,  manv-antara  is  called
antara, and isanukatha is called vamsa and
   vamsanucaritam. Nirodha and mukti are both called samstha in  the  second
list.” (Mukti can also be counted as one of the four types of  annihilations

   mentioned in
   TEXT 63). Below is a table comparing the two lists of ten topics:
   TOPICS IN THE BHAGAVATAM


   Listed by Sri Sukadeva Gosvami Listed by Sri Suta Gosvami
   1. Sarga (primary creation)    Sarga
   2. Visarga (secondary creation)      Visarga
   3. Sthana (maintenance)   Vrtti
   4. Posana (sustenance)    Raksa
   5. Uti (material desires) Hetu
   6. Manv-antara (reigns of Manus)     Antara
   7. Isanukatha (activities of Lord
   and His devotees)   Vamsa, Vamsanucarita
   8. Nirodha (annihilation) Samstha
   9. Mukti (liberation)     Samstha
   10. Asraya (the supreme shelter)     Apasraya
   A Maha-purana deals extensively with these ten  topics,  while  a  lesser
Purana  deals  with  only  five—sarga,  creation;  pratisarga,  dissolution;
vamsa, the genealogies of  kings  or  sages;  manv-antaras,  the  reigns  of
Manus; and vamsanucarita, the histories
   of various sages, kings, and incarnations. In the  course  of  discussing
these five topics, a lesser Purana will discuss all ten topics
   of a  Maha-purana,  but  will  treat  only  these  five  in  depth.  This
difference in how extensively the ten topics  are  treated  constitutes  the
principal distinction between a Maha-purana and a lesser
   Purana. The following table illustrates in what con
   TEXT a lesser Purana discusses the ten characteristics of a Maha-purana:
   1. Sarga            Sarga, Visarga, Asraya
   2. Pratisarga       Nirodha, Mukti
   3. Vamsa            Isanukatha
   4. Manv-antara      Manv-antara, Sthana
   5. Vamsanucarita    Isanukatha, Posana, Uti, Asraya
   Srimad-Bhagavatam contains twelve cantos, but the list
   of a Maha-purana’s topics is in the Second Canto.  From  this,  plus  the
fact that the  first  two  cantos  seem  in  some  ways  introductory,  some
scholars  conclude  that  the   Bhagavatam   explains   these   ten   topics
successively in each canto from the
   Third Canto onwards. Srila Jiva Gosvami has no regard  for  this  theory.
Since a Maha-purana treats ten topics,  if  the  first  two  cantos  of  the
Bhagavatam described none of these, then the Bhagavatam  proper  would  have
only ten cantos. It is obvious enough, however, that the  First  and  Second
Cantos discuss at least sarga, visarga, and raksa.
   Earlier Srila Jiva Gosvami listed the defining
   characteristics of Srimad-Bhagavatam, and among  these  were  its  having
eighteen thousand
   verses and twelve cantos and  its  beginning  with  a  reference  to  the
Gayatri mantra. If the
   first two cantos are not really part of the Bhagavatam, then what remains
no longer meets the criteria for being the Bhagavatam.  Other  scholars  say
that because Sukadeva speaks only from the Second Canto on, the First  Canto
is not part of the
   Bhagavatam proper. But their opinion is countered by the same reply.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami additionally argues that the  ten  topics  of  Srimad-
Bhagavatam are not described in strict sequence, one  per  canto.  First  of
all, there are twelve cantos and only ten topics. If we try to resolve  this
dilemma by excluding two of the cantos, Srimad-Bhagavatam  will  be  reduced
to less than the stipulated eighteen thousand  verses.  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami
further says that although nirodha is the  eighth  topic,  it  is  discussed
profusely in the Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth Cantos.
   This opinion is confirmed by Sridhara Svami, one of the earliest and most
respected authorities on Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   According to the adherents of a successive description of the ten  topics
beginning from the Third Canto, the Tenth Canto should describe the
   eighth topic, nirodha, and the Twelfth Canto  the  tenth  topic,  asraya.
Undoubtedly the Tenth Canto discusses nirodha, but its  principal  topic  is
the asraya, whom it establishes to be  Krsna,  the  Supreme  Personality  of
Godhead.
   In Srila Jiva Gosvami’s opinion, which finds support in
   Sridhara Svami’s writings, all twelve cantos of the  Bhagavatam  describe
all ten topics, though some cantos place more  emphasis  on  certain  topics
and less on others. In his Sarva-samvadini,  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  specifies
which topics are covered extensively in each canto:
    Topic         Cantos Primarily Discussed In
   1. Sarga            2, 3
   2. Visarga                2, 3, 4
   3. Vrtti                  3, 7, 11
   4. Raksa                  throughout
   5. Manv-antara            8
   6. Vamsa            4, 9
   7. Vamsanucarita    4, 9
   8. Samstha                11, 12
   9. Hetu             3, 11
   10. Apasraya        10
   As mentioned before, the ultimate  purpose  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  is  to
explain the
   tenth subject, the asraya, the Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead.  It  is
therefore illogical to expect that the Bhagavatam will deal with  the  other
nine  subjects  strictly  successively,  as   if   presenting   mathematical
theorems. Instead, the Bhagavatam presents these  other  subjects  primarily
to establish and explain the glories of the Supreme Lord. We have no  reason
to insist on a consecutive order of the ten subjects or  to  depreciate  the
first two cantos. From the very start of the  Tattva-sandarbha,  Srila  Jiva
Gosvami has proposed
   that Srimad-Bhagavatam focuses entirely on Lord Sri Krsna, the supreme
   shelter of all existence. The  Bhagavatam  describes  Sri  Krsna  in  its
beginning, middle,
   and end, and not just in the last  canto.  Sri  Jiva  will  explain  this
matter in more detail in Sri Krsna-sandarbha.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami presents Suta Gosvami’s definitions of the first
   seven of the ten topics.


===== TS.62 =====
NUMBER: 62
SOURCE LABEL: Text 62

TEXT 62.1
   VERSE = atha sargadinam laksanam aha
   avyakrta-guna-ksobhan mahatas tri-vrto ’hamah
   bhuta-matrendriyarthanam sambhavah sarga ucyate
   @VCONTINUE = pradhana-guna-ksobhan mahan tasmat tri-guno ’hankaras tasmad
bhuta-matranam  bhuta-suksmanam  indriyanam  ca  sthula-bhutanam   ca   tad-
upalaksita-tad-devatanam  ca  sambhavah  sargah.  karana-srstih  sarga   ity
arthah.
   Suta Gosvami then describes the features of  the  ten  topics,  beginning
with creation:
   “From the agitation of the original modes within
   the unmanifest material nature, the mahat-tattva arises. From the  mahat-
tattva comes the element false ego, which divides into three  aspects.  This
threefold ego further manifests as the subtle elements, as the  senses,  and
as the gross sense
   objects. The generation of all  of  these  is  called  creation  (sarga)”
[Bhag. 12.7.11].
   The mahat-tattva comes into being when the original, dormant
   material nature (pradhana) is agitated, and from the mahat comes false
   ego in each of the three material modes. From this threefold ego come the
subtle elements, the senses, and the physical elements.  The  appearance  of
the elements implies the appearance of their presiding deities as well.  All
together, the appearance of these constitutes sarga,
   the manifestation of the subtle causes of creation.


   TEXT 62.2
   purusanugrhitanam etesam vasana-mayah
   visargo ’yam samaharo bijad bijam caracaram
   @VCONTINUE = purusah paramatma. etesam mahad-adinam jivasya  purva-karma-
vasana-pradhano ’yam samaharah karya-bhutas caracara-prani-rupo bijad  bijam
iva pravahapanno visarga ucyate. vyasti-srstir visarga ity arthah.  anenotir
apy ukta.
   Suta Gosvami continues:
   “The secondary creation (visarga), which exists by the mercy of the Lord,
is the manifest amalgamation of the desires of the living entities. Just  as
a seed produces additional seeds, activities that promote  material  desires
in the performer produce moving and nonmoving life forms” [Bhag. 12.7.12].
   Here the word purusa (“person”) refers to the Supersoul, and etesam  (“of
these”) indicates
   the elements, beginning with the mahat. The primary reason  the  elements
combine is the karma the jivas have accumulated from their previous
   lives. Thus the moving and nonmoving living beings take their births in a
perpetual cycle,  like  the  generation  of  one  seed  from  another.  This
constant flow of generated products is called visarga,  secondary  creation.
In other words, visarga is the creation of  the  individual  organisms,  and
thus this discussion of visarga includes the topic  of  uti  (“impulses  for
activity”).


   TEXT 62.3
   vrttir bhutani bhutanam caranam acarani ca
   krta svena nrnam tatra kamac codanayapi va
   @VCONTINUE = caranam bhutanam samanyato ’carani ca-karac carani ca  kamad
vrttih. tatra tu nrnam  svena  svabhavena  kamac  codanayapi  va  ya  niyata
vrttir jivika krta sa vrttir ucyata ity arthah.
   “Vrtti means the process of sustenance, by which the moving  beings  live
upon the nonmoving. For a human being, vrtti specifically means  acting  for
one’s livelihood in a manner suited to one’s personal  nature.  Such  action
may be carried out either in pursuit of  selfish  desire  or  in  accordance
with the Vedic injunctions” [Bhag. 12.7.13].
   Mobile living beings generally thrive on immobile ones, but the  word  ca
(“and”) in this verse hints  that,  when  the  desire  impels  them,  moving
creatures will also subsist on other moving  creatures.  For  human  beings,
however, the
   means of livelihood is prescribed according to their individual
   natures, on the basis of either selfish desire or scriptural  injunction.
All this is called vrtti.


   TEXT 62.4
   raksacyutavatareha visvasyanu yuge yuge
   tiryan-martyarsi-devesu hanyante yais trayi-dvisah
   @VCONTINUE = yair avataraih. anenesa-katha sthanam  posanam  ceti  trayam
uktam.
   “In each age, the infallible Lord appears
   in this world among the animals, human beings, sages,  and  demigods.  By
His activities in these incarnations He protects the universe and kills  the
enemies of Vedic culture. This is called raksa” [Bhag. 12.7.14].
   Here the word yaih (“by them”) means by
   the  incarnations.  This  definition   of   “protection”   (raksa)   also
incorporates the three  topics  isa-katha  (“narrations  about  the  Supreme
Lord”), sthana (“maintenance”), and posana (“nourishment”).


   TEXT 62.5
   manv-antaram manur deva manu-putrah suresvarah
   rsayo ’msavataras ca hareh sad-vidham ucyate
   @VCONTINUE = manv-ady-acarana-kathanena sad-dharma evatra  vivaksita  ity
arthah. tatas ca praktana-granthenaikarthyam.
   “In each reign of Manu (manv-antara), six types of  personalities  appear
as manifestations of Lord Hari: the ruling Manu, the chief demigods, the
   sons of Manu, Indra, the great sages, and the partial incarnations
   of the Supreme Personality of Godhead” [Bhag. 12.7.15].
   From the mention here of the activities of the Manus and the  others,  it
is  understood  that  the  topic  of  sad-dharma   (“progressive   religious
principles”) is also covered. In  this  way  this  list  of  ten  topics  is
equivalent to the one given earlier in the Bhagavatam.


   TEXT 62.6
   rajïam brahma-prasutanam vamsas trai-kaliko ’nvayah
   vamsanucaritam tesam vrttam vamsa-dharas ca ye
   @VCONTINUE = tesam rajïam ye ca vamsa-dharas tesam vrttam vamsanucaritam.
   “Dynasties (vamsa) are lines of kings originating with
   Lord Brahma and extending continuously through past, present, and future.
The accounts of such dynasties, especially of their most prominent  members,
constitute  the  subject  of  dynastic   history   (vamsanucarita)”   [Bhag.
12.7.16].
   The activities of the vamsa-dharah (prominent members of those dynasties)
constitutes vamsanucarita (“dynastic history”).


   COMMENTARY
   Sri Suta Gosvami Defines the Bhagavatam's Topics
   At the end of the Second Canto Sukadeva Gosvami lists and defines the ten
topics of Srimad-Bhagavatam, and in the Twelfth Canto Suta Gosvami does  the
same.
   The first topic is sarga, primary creation. As we  have  already  pointed
out, during total dissolution everything in the material
   universe becomes unmanifest, a state called prakrti or pradhana. In  this
state the three modes of nature
   remain in equilibrium. Not until the modes are agitated and  put  out  of
balance can creation begin again.  This  same  principle  applies  to  human
beings: When a person is satisfied, peaceful, and  equipoised  he  will  not
initiate some new activity; some stimulus must disturb his  equilibrium  and
motivate him to act. One engages in sex, for example, when one’s mind
   and body are stimulated by lust or the desire to procreate.
   The original disturbance in the pradhana is caused by the glance of
   the Supreme Lord, with which He impregnates prakrti, or material  nature,
with all the conditioned jivas. Lord Krsna confirms this  in  the  Bhagavad-
gita (14.3): mama yonir mahad brahma
   tasmin  garbham  dadamy  aham.  “The  total  material  substance,  called
Brahman, is the source of birth, and it is that Brahman that I  impregnate.”
Here the word Brahman means prakrti, not the Lord’s impersonal feature.
   The impregnated or disturbed state of prakrti is called the mahat-tattva.
When further impelled by kala, the Lord’s time
   potency, the mahat-tattva gives rise to the three kinds of  ahankara,  or
false ego. These include vaikarika  ahankara,  false  ego  in  the  mode  of
goodness; taijasa ahankara, false ego in the mode  of  passion;  and  tamasa
ahankara, false ego in the mode of ignorance.
   Vaikarika ahankara gives rise to manas, the elemental substance of  mind,
and also to
   the presiding deities of material creation. Taijasa ahankara  gives  rise
to buddhi,
   the intelligence, and also  to  the  senses,  which  are  of  two  types,
perceptive and working. When the  kala  potency  acts  on  tamasa  ahankara,
sound comes into being, followed by ether and the ear. Under the impulse  of
time, ether then gives rise to tactility, and then air and the skin  evolve.
Similarly, air gives rise to form, after which  fire  and  the  eye  evolve;
fire gives rise to taste, and then water and the tongue evolve; and  finally
water gives rise to smell, after which earth and the nose evolve.  The  Lord
Himself performs this primary phase of creation (sarga), which includes  the
creation of the abovementioned elements’
   presiding deities. This is indicated here (in Bhag. 12.7.11) by the  word
artha.
   These are the stages of material creation in its primary phase (sarga):
   PRAKRTI OR PRADHANA
   (Balanced state of Nature)
   Glance of the Lord (with Kala)
   MAHAT-TATTVA (Citta)
   (Pradhana becomes disturbed)
   AHANKARA (False Ego)


   VAIKARIKA TAIJASA TAMASA
   (In Goodness) (In Passion) (In ignorance)
   MIND AND INTELLIGENCE 5 TAN-MATRAS PRESIDING DEITIES AND  SENSES  (Sound,
Touch, Form, Taste, Smell) and 5 material elements.


   As mentioned previously, the Bhagavatam distinguishes between the  senses
and the physical sense organs, the latter being the  seats  of  the  former.
The above chart shows that false ego in the mode of passion  gives  rise  to
intelligence and the senses. These senses  are  not  the  sense  organs  but
rather the subtle senses, which accompany the jiva from body  to  body.  The
physical sense organs, of course, are dissolved along with the rest  of  the
gross body at death.
   Each of the five tan-matras, the subtle manifestations  of  the  material
elements, becomes mixed with the time energy of the Lord and gives  rise  to
its corresponding gross element and the  seat  of  the  corresponding  sense
organ:
   TAN-MATRA MATERIAL ELEMENTS SEATS OF SENSES
   SOUND SKY EARS
   TOUC HAIR SKIN
   FORM FIRE EYE
   TASTE WATER TONGUE
   SMELL EARTH NOSE
   The  mahat-tattva,  ahankara,  mind,  and  intelligence  are   considered
internal senses. These four, plus the  five  working  senses  (legs,  hands,
anus, tongue, and genitals), the five perceptive senses (ears,  eyes,  nose,
skin, and tongue), the five gross material objects (sky, air,  fire,  water,
and earth), and the five subtle elements  (sound,  tactility,  form,  taste,
and smell) total twenty-four elements, and the jiva  and  Paramatma  can  be
counted as the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth. Time  (kala)  is  not  counted
separately, being an energy of the Paramatma.
   Because
   pure elements cannot be employed in the process  of  creation,  the  five
gross material elements  listed  above  must  be  further  combined  by  the
process called païci-karana. In this process each of the elements  is  mixed
with the other four according to a certain ratio. Then  Lord  Brahma,  using
these mixed elements, proceeds with the secondary phase of creation,  called
visarga. He creates the bodies of the myriad
   living beings according to the  stored-up  karmic  impressions  of  their
previous
   lives.  Visarga  includes  the  manifestation   of   Brahma’s   mind-born
sons—Atri, Vasistha, Daksa,  Manu,  and  others.  Some  of  these  sons  are
Prajapatis, progenitors, whose offspring populate the universe.  The  phases
of creation continue in cycles, one phase giving rise to the next, like  one
seed giving rise to another
   seed. The seeds  in  this  creative  process  are  the  living  entities’
fruitive activities.
   After sarga and visarga come vrtti, sustenance. As stated in
   Srimad-Bhagavatam (1.13.47), one living being is generally  sustained  by
eating others:
   ahastani sa-hastanam apadani catus-padam
   phalguni tatra mahatam jivo jivasya jivanam
“Those who are devoid of hands are prey for  those  who  have  hands;  those
devoid of legs are prey for the four-legged. The weak  are  the  subsistence
of the strong, and the general rule holds that one living being is food  for
another.”
   Usually, immovable beings are food for those that move, but  some  moving
beings, such as tigers, prey  on  other  moving  beings.  Human  beings  are
special because they can choose what kind of food they  will  eat.  In  this
matter they can be guided either by their own desires
   or by Vedic scriptural injunction. Those who eat according to whim  glide
down to hellish species, while those who follow
   scripture progress toward liberation.
   Since Lord Visnu accepts the responsibility of maintaining Vedic  culture
in the universe,
   He incarnates in every millennium to protect His devotees  and  curb  the
demoniac. This is called raksa, protection. The Lord does not  restrict  His
appearances only to the human species. As  Prahlada  Maharaja  says  in  his
prayers to  Lord  Nrsimha,  ittham  nr-tiryag-rsi-deva-jhasavatarair/  lokan
vibhavayasi  hamsi  jagat  pratipan:  “My  Lord,  You  appear   in   various
incarnations as a human being, an animal, a great saint, a demigod, a  fish,
or a tortoise, thus maintaining the entire creation in  different  planetary
systems and killing the demoniac principles” (Bhag. 7.9.38).
   The material creation is manifest for the duration of
   Lord Brahma’s life, one hundred years according to his
   time scale. His one day lasts for one
   thousand cycles of the four yugas—Satya, Treta,  Dvapara,  and  Kali.  By
human calculation, therefore, a day of  Brahma  lasts  4,320,000,000  years.
For managerial purposes he divides each of his days  into  fourteen  periods
called manv-antaras. The person who rules during each of  these  periods  is
called Manu, who is assisted by his sons; by demigods  such  as  Candra  and
Varuna; by Lord Indra; by the seven great sages, called sapta-rsis;  and  by
a special
   partial expansion of the Supreme Lord who incarnates for each  particular
manv-antara. The demigods and sages are all appointed for the period of  one

   manv-antara, and the activities of these great  personalities  constitute
sad-dharma, or progressive religious principles.
   At present we are in the period of the  seventh  Manu,  Vaivasvata  Manu,
more exactly in the 5,092nd year of Kali-yuga,  in  the  twenty-eighth  yuga
cycle of the day of Brahma called the Svetavaraha-kalpa, during  his  fifty-
first year. Srimad-Bhagavatam names the fourteen Manus, the corresponding
   incarnations special to their periods, and the names of  Indra  in  these
periods:
   MANU MANU’S FATHER CORRESPONDING NAME OF AVATARA INDRA
   1. Svayambhuva Brahma Yajïa Yajïa
   2. Svarocisa Agni Vibhu Rocana
   3. Uttama Priyavrata Satyasena Satyajit
   4. TamasaPriyavrataHariTrisikha
   5. RaivataPriyavrataVaikunthaVibhu
   6. CaksusaCaksur Ajita Mantradruma
   7. Vaivasvata
   (Sraddhadeva)Vivasvan VamanaPurandara
   8. SavarniVivasvanSarvabhaumaBali
   9. Daksa-savarniVarunaRsabhaAdbhuta
   10. Brahma-savarniUpaslokaVisvaksenaSambhu
   11. Dharma-savarniUpaslokaDharmasetuVaidhrta
   12. Rudra-savarniUpaslokaSvadhamaRtadhama
   13. Deva-savarniUpaslokaYogesvaraDivaspati
   14. Indra-savarniUpaslokaBrhadbhanuSuci
   Two prominent dynasties of kings come from Lord Brahma—
   the sun dynasty and the  moon  dynasty.  The  description  of  the  deeds
performed by
   the kings appearing in these dynasties is called
   vamsanucaritam.
   In the next
   TEXT Srila Jiva Gosvami explains the definitions of the remainder of  the
Bhagavatam’s ten topics and
   concludes Sri Tattva-sandarbha by explaining their purpose.


===== TS.63 =====
NUMBER: 63
SOURCE LABEL: Text 63

TEXT 63.1
   naimittikah prakrtiko nitya atyantiko layah
   samstheti kavibhih proktas caturdhasya svabhavatah
   @VCONTINUE = asya paramesvarasya.  svabhavatah  saktitah.  atyantika  ity
anena muktir apy atra pravesita.
   “There are four  types  of  cosmic  annihilations—occasional,  elemental,
continuous, and ultimate—all of which are effected by the  inherent  potency
of  the  Supreme  Lord.  Learned  scholars  have   designated   this   topic
dissolution (samstha)” (Bhag. [12.7.17].
   In this verse the word  asya  (“His”)  refers  to  the  Paramesvara,  the
Supreme Lord, while svabhavatah (“due to nature”)
   means “by His energy.” The  term  atyantikah  (“ultimate”)  implies  that
mukti (liberation) is included in this kind of dissolution.


   TEXT 63.2
   hetur jivo ’sya sargader avidya-karma-karakah
   yam canusayinam prahur avyakrtam utapare
   @VCONTINUE = hetur nimittam. asya visvasya.  yato  ’yam  avidyaya  karma-
karakah. yam eva  hetum  kecic  caitanya-pradhanyenanusayinam  prahur  apara
upadhi-pradhanyenavyakrtam iti.
   “Out of ignorance the  living  being  performs  material  activities  and
thereby becomes in one sense the cause (hetu) of the creation,  maintenance,
and destruction of the universe. Some authorities call the living being  the
personality underlying the material creation, while others  say  he  is  the
unmanifest self” [Bhag. 12.7.18].
   The hetu (“cause”) here is the nimitta, or  efficient  cause.  Asya  (“of
this”) refers to this universe, the existence of which is due to the  jivas,
who act in ignorance. Some call that same  cause  the  anusayi  (“underlying
personality”), highlighting the principle  of  consciousness,  while  others
call him the avyakrta  (“unmanifest”),  focusing  attention  on  the  jivas’
upadhis.


   TEXT 63.3
   vyatirekanvayau yasya jagrat-svapna-susuptisu
   maya-mayesu tad brahma jiva-vrttisv apasrayah
   @VCONTINUE =  Sri-badarayana-samadhi-labdhartha-virodhad  atra  ca  jiva-
suddha-svarupam evasrayatvena na vyakhyayate.  kintv  ayam  evartho  jagrad-
adisv  avasthasu  maya-mayesu  maya-sakti-kalpitesu  mahad-adi-dravyesu   ca
kevala-svarupena vyatirekah parama-saksitayanvayas ca yasya  tad  brahma  ca
jivanam  vrttisu  suddha-svarupataya  sopadhitaya  ca   vartanesu   sthitisv
apasrayah sarvam aty atikramyasraya ity arthah. apa ity etat  khalu  varjane
varjanam catikrame paryavasyatiti.
   “The Supreme Absolute Truth is  present  throughout  all  the  states  of
awareness—waking consciousness, sleep, and  deep  sleep—throughout  all  the
phenomena manifested by the external energy, and  within  the  functions  of
all living entities, and He  also  exists  separate  from  all  these.  Thus
situated in His own transcendence, He is the ultimate  and  unique  shelter”
[Bhag. 12.7.19].
   It cannot be said that the jiva is the asraya, even in  his  pure  state.
That
   would go against what Srila Vyasadeva experienced in trance. Rather,  the
correct understanding
   is as follows:
   The Supreme Brahman is alone in His original identity. He is always
   aloof from the states of consciousness known as waking awareness  and  so
on, and also
   from the manifestations of matter, beginning with the  mahat-tattva.  All
these are products of the external energy, that is to say, creations of  His
Maya potency. While  remaining  aloof  from  all  these  manifestations,  He
simultaneously associates with them in His feature  as  the  Supersoul,  the
supreme witness. Therefore He is the basis  for  the  jivas’  activities  in
both his pure and his conditioned states. But in this con
   TEXT the word apasraya indicates that even while He is the foundation for
the jivas’ activities He still remains transcendental to
   everything; the prefix apa refers to “abandonment,” which here amounts to
the idea of transcending.


   TEXT 63.4
   tad evam apasrayabhivyakti-dvara-bhutam hetu-sabda-vyapadistasya  jivasya
suddha-svarupa-jïanam aha dvabhyam
   padarthesu yatha dravyam tan-matram rupa-namasu
   bijadi-païcatantasu hy avasthasu yutayutam


   virameta yada cittam hitva vrtti-trayam svayam
   @V1PLUS = yogena va tadatmanam vedehaya nivartate
   Such knowledge of the
   pure nature of the jiva, who is here designated  the  cause  of  material
existence,  leads  to  realization  of  the  apasraya,   or   transcendental
fountainhead of existence, as Suta Gosvami states in two verses:
   “Although a material object may  assume  various  forms  and  names,  its
essential ingredient is always  present  as  the  basis  of  its  existence.
Similarly, both conjointly and separately, the jiva is always  present  with
the created material body throughout  its  phases  of  existence,  beginning
with conception and ending with death.
   “Either on the strength of one’s own power of discrimination  or  because
of one’s regulated spiritual practice, one’s mind may  stop  functioning  on
the material platform of waking consciousness, sleep, and deep  sleep.  Then
the jiva understands the Supreme Soul and withdraws from material  endeavor”
[Bhag. 12.7.20–21].


   TEXT 63.5
   rupa-namatmakesu padarthesu ghatadisu  yatha  dravyam  prthivy-adi  yutam
ayutam ca bhavati karya-drstim vinapy upalambhat  tatha  tan-matram  suddham
jiva-caitanya-matram vastu garbhadhanadi-païcatantasu navasv  apy  avasthasv
avidyaya yutam svatas tv ayutam iti suddham atmanam ittham jïatva  nirvinnah
sann apasrayanusandhana-yogyo bhavatity aha virameteti. vrtti-trayam jagrat-
svapna-susupti-rupam. atmanam paramatmanam.  svayam  vamadevader  iva  maya-
mayatvanusandhanena devahuty-ader ivanusthitena  yogena  va.  tatas  cehayas
tad-anusilana-vyatirikta-cestayah. Sri-sutah. uddistah sambandhah.
   We can consider the substances earth, water,  and  so  on  to  be  either
associated with their  products  having  names  and  forms—such  as  pots—or
separate from them. After all, we can identify these substances  even  apart
from their products. In the same way, although by  the  force  of  ignorance
the originally pure spirit soul becomes involved with  the  nine  stages  of
life from conception to death, he  can  nonetheless  become  indifferent  by
understanding that he is in fact distinct from all this  by  virtue  of  his
being a pure self. Thus becoming aloof, he  is  then  qualified  to  inquire
about the asraya. That is  the  purport  of  the  verse  beginning  virameta
[Bhag. 12.7.21].
   The vrtti-trayam (“three functional states”) are the  states  of  waking,
dreaming, and deep sleep. Atmanam (“Self”) here means the Supersoul.  Svayam
(“by oneself”) means by carefully studying the illusory nature of the
   world, as the sage Vamadeva did. Yogena (“by yoga”)  indicates  that  one
may conduct this study by means of the kind of meditation  Srimati  Devahuti
and others practiced. Ihaya nivartate (“he becomes free from  all  actions”)
means that he
   refrains from all activities other than the practice of God-realization.
   This is our explanation of  sambandha,  the  connection  between  Srimad-
Bhagavatam and the subject it discusses.


   TEXT 63.6
   iti       kali-yuga-pavana-sva-bhajana-vibhajana-prayojanavatara-Sri-Sri-
bhagavat-krsna-caitanya-deva-carananucara-visva-vaisnava-raja-sabha-
sabhajana-bhajana-Sri-rupa-sanatananusasana-bharati-garbhe    Sri-bhagavata-
sandarbhe tattva-sandarbho nama prathamah sandarbhah.
   Thus  ends  the  Tattva-sandarbha,  the  first  book  of  the  Bhagavata-
sandarbha, which was written according to the  instructions  of  Srila  Rupa
Gosvami
   and Srila Sanatana Gosvami, the revered leaders of  the  universal  royal
assembly
   of Vaisnavas. They are unalloyed  servants  of  the  lotus  feet  of  the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya
   Mahaprabhu, the purifier of the jivas in Kali-yuga, who descended to
   distribute the benediction of His own devotional service.


   COMMENTARY
   Conclusion
   The dissolution of the material creation is called samstha, of which Suta
Gosvami says there are four kinds—naimittika, prakrtika, nitya,
   and atyantika. The dissolution that comes at the end of Lord Brahma’s day
is
   called the naimittika, or occasional. The dissolution of the universe at
   the end of Lord Brahma’s life  is  called  prakrtika,  or  complete.  The
inexorable moment-by-moment progression of everything in the material  world

   toward annihilation is called the nitya, or continuous,
   dissolution. And when an individual jiva gets free from both  his  subtle
and gross
   bodies and enters the spiritual sky, that is called the atyantika,
   or ultimate, dissolution, namely liberation. Having attained this  state,
one
   does not have to take birth again in this material world. Thus Srila Jiva
Gosvami says that atyantika-laya includes mukti, the ninth topic  among  the
ten topics of Srimad-Bhagavatam Sukadeva Gosvami enumerated in
   TEXT 56.
   In his Sarva-samvadini Srila Jiva Gosvami states that, in addition to the
dissolutions mentioned above, there
   is also a  partial  dissolution  at  the  end  of  each  manv-antara.  To
substantiate t
   his statement he cites the Visnu-dharmottara
   Purana, Srimad-Bhagavatam, and the Bharata-tatparya of  Sri  Madhvacarya.
Part of  the  reference  from  the  Visnu-dharmottara  Purana  (1.75.1,  –2)
states:
   vajra uvaca
   manv-antare pariksine yadrsi dvija jayate
   samavastha maha-bhaga tadrsim vaktum arhasi


   markandeya uvaca
   manv-antare pariksine deva manv-antaresvarah
   mahar-lokam athasadya tisthanti gata-kalmasah
“King Vajra asked, `O brahmana, what is the situation of the  world  when  a
manv-antara ends? Please explain this to me.’
   “Markandeya replied, `At the end of a manv-antara, the demigods appointed
for that particular manv-antara, being free from sins, attain  to  Maharloka
and reside there.’”
   Markandeya goes on to explain that the seven sages, Manu, and Indra go to
Brahmaloka while the earth becomes submerged in a deluge.  This  description
of the general annihilation at the end of each  manv-antara  is  similar  to
the one given in  the  Twenty-fourth  Chapter  of  the  Bhagavatam’s  Eighth
Canto. Srila Jiva Gosvami comments that the occurrenc of  a  dissolution  at
the end of each manv-antara is further substantiated by the Hari-vamsa
   Purana and commentaries on its  chapters  dealing  with  the  subject  of
universal dissolution. Thus the dissolution at the end of a manv-antara  can

   be categorized as naimittika, or occasional, because it occurs repeatedly
with the changes of Manus.
   The hetu, or efficient cause of
   creation, is the jiva. The Supreme Lord has nothing to gain  by  creating
this material world. He has
   His own transcendental abode, where He engages in loving pastimes with
   His dear devotees. But for the welfare of those living beings who have
   turned their backs on Him, He has created this universe, where the  jivas
are  avidya-karma-karaka,  acting  out  of  ignorance  and  sustaining   the
universe. In that sense the jivas are the efficient
   cause behind the creation, even though they neither  design  nor  produce
it. As Lord Krsna states in the
   Bhagavad-gita (7.5), jiva-bhutam maha-baho yayedam  dharyate  jagat:  The
living entities sustain the whole material world.
   The Lord’s ultimate purpose in creating the material world is  to  enable
the jivas to attain liberation from the cycle of repeated birth  and  death.
Sukadeva Gosvami states this explicitly in Srimad-Bhagavatam (10.87.2):
   buddhindriya-manah-pranan jananam asrjat prabhuh
   matrartham ca bhavartham ca atmane ’kalpanaya ca
“The Supreme Lord manifested the material intelligence,  senses,  mind,  and
vital air of the living entities so that they could  indulge  their  desires
for  sense  gratification,  take  repeated  births  to  engage  in  fruitive
activities,  become  elevated  in  future  lives,  and   ultimately   attain
liberation.”
   From this we can see that the jiva is certainly not the asraya
   of the universe. According to Srila
   Vyasadeva’s realization in trance, that position belongs to  the  Supreme
Lord.
   But if the Lord is the asraya of this material world,  wouldn’t  He  also
necessarily be in
   contact with Maya and her creation? Sri Suta  Gosvami  replies  that  the
Supreme Lord is apasraya, the transcendental shelter. In other words, He  is
the asraya, but He is apart from Maya. In the Bhagavad-gita (7.4)  the  Lord
describes His own material nature as bhinna prakrti, His  separated  energy.
In His original form the Supreme Personality of Godhead is completely  aloof
from His creation, but as the
   Supersoul He witnesses and controls the activities of both the jivas  and
Maya.
   Thus by His inconceivable potency He both associates  with  the  creation
and remains aloof from it.  This  He  also  confirms  in  the  Bhagavad-gita
(9.4):
   maya tatam idam sarvam jagad avyakta-murtina
   mat-sthani sarva-bhutani na caham tesv avasthitah
“By Me, in My unmanifested
   form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am
   not in them.” Yet even though as the  Supersoul  the  Lord  pervades  the
universe and controls it, He is neither in  physical  contact  with  it  nor
influenced by it.
   In
   TEXT 53 Srila Jiva Gosvami showed that knowledge of the pure
   nature of the jiva is the first step in the science of God-
   realization. Here in
   TEXT 63 he substantiates this statement with two  verses  spoken  by  Sri
Suta Gosvami (quoted in
   TEXT 63.4).
   In Srimad-Bhagavatam (11.22.47) Lord Krsna mentions the  nine  states  of
bodily existence the jiva experiences: conception, gestation,
   birth, infancy,  childhood,  youth,  middle  age,  old  age,  and  death.
Although in his conditioned state the jiva seems  to  associate  with  these
nine states,  he  never  actually  does.  Just  as  clay  is  the  essential
constituent of a pot yet still exists independent of the pot,  so  the  jiva
animates his body but still exists independent of  the  body  and  its  nine
states.
   When a person knows that, whether awake,  dreaming,  or  merged  in  deep
sleep, he is always distinct from his body during all the
   nine states, he is
   qualified to walk on the path of God-realization. That is the stage
   of athato brahma-jijïasa: One who knows he is distinct from the  body  is
qualified to inquire into the Absolute Truth (V.s. 1.1.1).
   This
   TEXT describes two processes for self-realization. The
   word svayam (“by oneself”) implies  the  path  of  jïana,  in  which  one
meditates on the
   self as different from everything else in the realm of Maya.
   The Brhad-aranyaka Upanisad relates the history of a sage named  Vamadeva
who followed this path, and the Eleventh Canto  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  tells
of another practitioner, Dattatreya.
   The second process is implied by the word yoga, which means the
   path of bhakti. On this path one considers  oneself  different  from  the
three
   states of existence—the  waking  state,  the  dreaming  state,  and  deep
sleep—and meditates on the Supersoul. This path is
   exemplified by Lord Kapiladeva’s mother, Srimati Devahuti, whose story is
told in the Third Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   Srila Jiva Gosvami concludes that the asraya of everything  is  Lord  Sri
Krsna,  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead;  He  alone  is  the  subject
(sambandhi-
   tattva) of Srimad-Bhagavatam.
   The following is a summary  of  Sri  Tattva-sandarbha:  The  first  eight
Texts, which are in verse form, make up the
   invocation, or mangalacarana. In these verses Srila Jiva Gosvami prays to
his teachers and his
   worshipable Deity, and he also tells why  he  is  writing  the  book  and
defines its subject and the
   qualifications one must have to read it.
   In  Texts  9  through  26  Jiva  Gosvami   discusses   Gaudiya   Vaisnava
epistemology. He first points out that all human beings are subject to  four
defects that prevent them from acquiring  perfect  knowledge  independently.
Of the ten means of gaining knowledge Srila  Jiva  accepts  sabda,  revealed
scripture, as supreme, for it alone can give one  perfect  knowledge.  Since
the Vedas are sabda-brahma, knowledge revealed by  the  Supreme  Lord,  they
are the highest authority. But because they are now
   unavailable in their complete form, because they are cryptic, and because
they can no longer be learned from representatives  of  a  proper  disciplic
succession of teachers, Srila Jiva Gosvami recommends  the  Puranas,  which,
along with the Ramayana and Mahabharata, constitute  the  fifth  Veda.  Next
Srila Jiva shows that the
   Puranas have the same source, authority, and nature  as  the  Vedas,  and
that, for us in this age, their simple language and universal  accessibility
render them an even better source of knowledge than the other four Vedas.
   But the Puranas seem to
   contradict  one  another  in  various  ways—for  example,  by  glorifying
different deities as  most  worshipable—and  most  of  them  lack  a  proper
disciplic succession. By the process of elimination, therefore, in
   TEXT 18  Srila  Jiva  Gosvami  proposes  Srimad-Bhagavatam  as  the  most
suitable Purana
   for investigation. From
   TEXT 19 to 26  Srila  Jiva  reveals  the  supreme  qualities  of  Srimad-
Bhagavatam and shows how it is the most
   authoritative Vedic scripture, the ripened fruit of the  desire  tree  of
Vedic knowledge. He shows that  the  Bhagavatam  is  based  on  the  Gayatri
mantra, the essence of the Vedas, and that it is the natural
   COMMENTARY  on the Vedanta-sutra. In Texts 27 and 28 Srila Jiva describes
the basic scheme of the Sandarbhas, what sources he plans to refer  to,  and
his method of analysis.
   From Texts 29 to 63 he establishes the following principles:
   1. The subject matter of Srimad-Bhagavatam is Lord
   Krsna.
   2. Lord Krsna is the original personality of Godhead.
   3. He has
   multifarious   potencies,   which   are   divided   into    three    main
categories—internal,
   external, and marginal.
   4. Maya, His external energy, works under Him but
   cannot control Him.
   5. The jivas have been bound by Maya since time
   immemorial.
   6. The jivas cannot transcend Maya by their own power.
   7.
   Surrender to the Lord is the jivas’ only means of liberation.
   8. The goal of life is to attain prema, love of Krsna.
   To establish these eight principles, Srila Jiva  Gosvami  first  examines
the inner mood of Sri Sukadeva
   Gosvami, the speaker of Srimad-Bhagavatam. In
   TEXT 29 he quotes and analyzes Sri Suta
   Gosvami’s prayers, which  describe  Sukadeva’s  realization  and  exalted
position. Then, from Texts 30 to 49 he examines
   the description of what Srila Vyasadeva realized in trance, which is  the
basis upon which he composed  Srimad-Bhagavatam.  While  describing  Vyasa’s
trance, Srila Jiva Gosvami uses logic and scriptural reference in  Texts  34
to 43 to decisively smash the two primary
   doctrines of the Mayavadis, pariccheda-vada and pratibimba-vada.
   From Texts 50 to 52 he shows that Srimad-Bhagavatam’s
   subject is the nondual supreme reality by analyzing the second  verse  of
its first chapter. In
   Texts 53 to 55 he explains the nature of the jiva—namely, that the  jiva,
being a fractional part of Brahman, is conscious like Brahman but can  never
be equal to Brahman. Srila Jiva Gosvami  explains  that  understanding  this
similarity  between  the  jiva  and  Brahman  is  the  initial  step  toward
realizing the Absolute Truth.
   From
   TEXT 56 on he examines  the  subject  matter  of  Srimad-Bhagavatam  from
another  angle.  Here  he  analyzes  the  Bhagavatam’s  ten  topics,  citing
Sukadeva Gosvami’s list in the  Second  Canto  and  Suta  Gosvami’s  in  the
Twelfth. He shows that there  is  no  clash  of  either  spirit  or  content
between these two great Bhagavatam authorities.  In  their  descriptions  of
the first nine topics, both Sukadeva and Suta  convey  an  understanding  of
the multifarious potencies and activities of the tenth  topic,  the  shelter
of all, Lord Sri Krsna.
   Thus from various angles Jiva Gosvami has established that Srimad-
   Bhagavatam is the ultimate scriptural authority and that it  teaches  the
following: Sri Krsna is  the  Supreme  Personality  of  Godhead,  devotional
service is the process for attaining the supreme  goal  of  life,  and  this
supreme goal is unalloyed love of Godhead.
   In the next three Sandarbhas, Srila Jiva Gosvami will  further  elaborate
on the sambandhi-tattva.
   HARI OM TAT SAT
   asadhasya site pakse dvitiyayam rathotsave
   grahe vede randhre netre tikeyam purnatam gata


   Sri-guror-mukhabjac chrutva Sri-haridasac chastrinah
   yatha-matih krta tika satam esa prasidatam
   Thus ends the Sri-jiva-tosani
   COMMENTARY  on Sri Tattva-sandarbha, the first book of Sri Sat-sandarbha,
by Srila Jiva Gosvami Prabhupada.








   -----------------------
[1] Literally ``three basic scriptures." They include the eleven principal
Upanisads, the Vedanta-sutra, and the Bhagavad-gita.
[2] The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust edition of Srimad-Bhagavatam has a variant
reading here: om namo bhagavate.
[3] None of these commentaries is available at present except the Bhavartha-
dipika of Sridhara Svami.

[4] Instead of ``vedantasya," the current edition of Bharatatatparyya
(Udupi, 1971) reads ``vedan ca asya," which means ``having understood the
other scriptures and the Vedas by the mercy of the Lord."

[5] The basis of this principle is that when a metal-worker is given two
jobs, to manufacture a needle and also a kettle, he will fashion the needle
first and get it out of the way.

[6] The term satvata has the same meaning as bhagavata. Samhita means ``a
compilation."

[7]The real meaning of neti neti is “not this much,” implying that the Lord
is not limited to this phenomenal world but exists even beyond it. A
description of this understanding of neti neti is given in Srimad-
Bhagavatam 2.2.18.

[8]The real meaning is that the jiva is conditioned by the material body,
which is a product (karya) of Maya, and that the Lord in His Purusa
incarnation has Maya (karana) as His upadhi. But she never influences Him.

[9]For the real meaning of this verse see Text 42.

[10] The implication of this verse is that there is one Absolute
Personality of Godhead, who manifests in many svamsa and vibhinnamsa forms,
and that all these expansions are nondifferent from Him.
[11]Ardha-kukkuti-nyaya, or ``the logic of half a hen," refers to the
philosophy of the foolish farmer who hoped to maximize his profits by
cutting off the head of his egg-laying hen so he wouldn't have to feed her.
The same logic is applied by a person who accepts only the parts of
scripture he agrees with and rejects the rest.

[12]For more details refer to The Nectar Of Devotion, by His Divine Grace
A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada.

[13]This story is not in current editions of this Purana.

